
“Transmit Our edict,” said Guangwu, “Tomorrow is the Festival of Clear and Bright, the third of the third month,3 so put this up on a yellow plaque: ‘We will enjoy the pleasure of this garden with the common folk.’”
When the next day arrived, the Hundred Surnames all enjoyed the flowers inside the Imperial Park, and they occupied all of the kiosks and halls.
Suddenly a single student came on the scene. In a white robe, a horn-studded belt, a gauze cap, and black boots—his left hand swinging a pot of wine; his right carrying an earthen bowl; and his back bearing his zither, sword, and book basket—he came to enjoy the sights of the Imperial Park. But he got there late and all the kiosks and halls were so full there was no place to sit. Our young burgeoning talent went straight ahead for a hundred paces or so and saw a cypress that would block the wind. And there he put his wine pot and earthen bowl down on the lush and green carpet of grass and unslung his sword, zither, and book basket. He settled himself down and poured some wine into the earthen bowl. After one drink he was thirsty for more, and he drank three more bowlsful, one after the other. Before you could snap your fingers, he was already half sloshed.
As soon as one bowl of Bamboo Leaf 4 pierces through his heart, Two peach blossoms appear on his face.
Now what was the name of our burgeoning talent? His surname was Sima, and he was known as Zhongxiang. Because he became a bit dejected while sitting there, he played a tune on his zither, and when done, opened up his book box and [1b] took out a book. He opened it to read, and reached the part about how the doomed Qin had pushed roads across the Five Ranges in the south,5 built the Great Wall in the north, filled in the Great Sea in the east, and in the west had constructed the Epang Palace, and how it had buried the scholars and burned the books. When Zhongxiang saw this, he could not suppress his fury and violently cursed, “The First Emperor was a ruler without the Way. Had I, Zhongxiang, been the ruler, of course I would have ensured that the common people of the whole world were overjoyed!” He also said, “The First Emperor oppressed the common people until eight or nine out of every ten died, none were given a decent burial, and the stench offended Heaven and Earth! Since
 
Sima Zhongxiang’s Karmic Dream 3
the Lord of Heaven made the First Emperor a ruler, even he must have some blind spots. Now in the south the First Emperor feared that Xiang Yu had already turned against him at Langya and then, in Xuzhou, Liu the Third6 of Feng in Pei had ‘roused righteous men’ to revolt. Blades and weapons suddenly sprang up throughout the world—troops suffered the hardship of belting on armor, and people suffered the misery of dirt and ashes.”
As soon as he had said this more than fifty men, clad in brocade gowns and flowery caps, suddenly emerged from behind a trellis of wild-roses and marched over to him. At the head were two rows of eight men in purple vestments and golden belts, with ivory tablets and ravenblack boots. One official of some rank or another, with a purple and gold fish7 hanging from his belt, addressed him as follows, “At the behest of the Jade Emperor we request Your Majesty to accept these six major ritual gifts.” Zhongxiang saw that another person was holding a golden-phoenix plate, on which six objects had been placed.8 These were the Equal-to-Heaven Cap, the Coiling-Dragons Robe, the Without-Worries Shoes, a scepter of white jade, a belt made of jade, and the precious sword of authority. After he was persuaded to do so, Zhongxiang accepted all of these objects and immediately put them on; he then sat down, holding the whitejade scepter in his hands.
The eight men told him, “This is not a proper place for Your Majesty to sit.” They had barely finished speaking when, all of a sudden, among those fifty men in their flowery caps several lifted up and brought over a dragon-phoenix palanquin which they put down in front of him. “May Your Majesty ascend the chair!” Zhongxiang lifted the hem of his yellow gown, ascended the chair and sat in a dignified manner. The eight men divided themselves into two rows to head the cortege, while behind him the fifty with flowery hats surrounded him in a dense group. They walked all the way to a palace hall that was covered with glazed tiles, and someone said, “We invite our king to dismount.”
He ascended the hall and saw a Nine-Dragon Throne. Zhongxiang sat down there in a dignified manner to receive congratulatory hurrahs of “Long live our Majesty,” and when that was done, the eight men addressed him as follows, “Your Majesty knows the crimes of Wang Mang: he killed Emperor Ping with poisoned wine, executed the infant Ying, did in the empress, and cleaned out their palace apartments, killing who knows how many palace beauties.9 These
 
were his crimes. Later he established the house of Xin and became emperor. He took on the adult name Great Lord. [2a] But eighteen years later Liu Xiu from Whitewater Village in Dengzhou in Nanyang rose in righteous rebellion, smashed that Wang Mang, and snatched the empire back again. He deposed Wang Mang, who is now banished and locked away in a courtyard. Currently, His Majesty Guangwu occupies the throne. For his ministers he has in support the lords of the twenty-eight fixed constellations and the four Dipper stars to serve him as generals and commanders. Guangwu is the Great Thearch of Purple Tenuity.10 Now a sky cannot have two suns; a people cannot have two rulers. But you, our king, have here accepted this appointment. Yet you have neither troops nor generals. Not only do you lack wisdom and cunning, you don’t even have the strength to truss up a chicken. If Guangwu learns about this, leads his troop and officers and appoints a grand marshal, you think he’ll let you off?”
Zhongxiang asked, “My ministers, what would you have Us do?”
The eight men said, “Your Majesty should try out the Nine-Dragon Throne but if you look up at the plaque below the eaves, you’ll see this is definitely not the Major Audience Hall with its nine bays.”
When Zhongxiang looked up, he saw a red-lacquered plaque with four golden characters as big as dustpans:“Hall for Avenging Wrongs.” Zhongxiang dropped his head and pondered the meaning but couldn’t figure it out. So he asked, “My ministers, We do not understand what this means.”
The eight men replied, “Your Majesty, this is not the world of light, but that of the shades. A moment ago when you were reading about the doomed Qin in the Imperial Garden, you vilified the First Emperor and complained about the intentions of Heaven and Earth. Your Majesty, is it not said that those who follow the Buddha are reborn above into paradise, but those who do not are reborn below into hell? Just consider the people who lived in the times of Yao, Shun, Yu, and Tang: they deserved to be rewarded, just as the people of Jie and Zhou deserved to be slaughtered.11 Our king does not understand the meaning in all of this: a ruler without the Way has a people who have committed a karmic sin. This is precisely by design of the Lord of Heaven. By vilifying the First Emperor you displayed your resentment toward the Lord of Heaven.
 
Sima Zhongxiang’s Karmic Dream 5
The Lord of Heaven ordered us to summon Your Majesty and make you the Lord of the Underworld in the Palace for Avenging Wrongs. If you can pass sentence on these underworld cases without any partiality, he will make you the Son of Heaven in the world of light, but if you judge them wrongly, you will be banished to the backside of the Mountain of Darkness and never again see human form.”
Zhongxiang said, “Which cases do I have to judge?”
The eight replied, “Your Majesty, you only have to transmit your sagely order and there will be people who submit a statement and make an accusation.”
“Well, I’ll do as you say.” When he transmitted his sagely order, there was indeed a man who loudly shouted, “I’ve suffered a wrong!” In his hand he held a single-page writ of accusation.
When Zhongxiang [2b] had a better look he saw a man with a golden helmet on his head, wearing golden chain-mail armor, dark red battle dress, and shiny black boots.12 Blood flowed from his neck and stained his gown below. He kept on shouting, “Injustice” and “I’ve been wronged.” When Zhongxiang accepted his written statement and unrolled it on his desk to read it, it turned out to be a case from 205 years past. “How in the world do you think I can pass sentence on such a case?” And he swept the documents from his desk. But the person lodging the accusation said, “I am Han Xin. I suffered at the hands of Gaozu of the Former Han. I hail from Huaiyin and achieved the rank of King of the Three Qi. I accumulated ten great merits. I pretended to construct a trestle road as a diversion so I could secretly cross Chencang and chase Xiang Yu to Raven River, where he wound up slitting his own throat. But while I made this major contribution to the establishment of the Han, Gaozu never even thought about ‘carrying the axle, pushing the wheel, or speaking an oath.’13 He pretended to go off on a visit to Yunmeng and had Empress Dowager Lü trick me into going to Weiyang Palace where I was slain by a blunt sword. I died through injustice, so please act on my behalf!”
A startled Zhongxiang exclaimed, “What should I do?”
“Your Majesty,” replied the eight men, “if you cannot quickly decide a case like this, how can you ever become a Son of Heaven in the World of Light?”
Before their words ended, he heard yet someone else shouting, “I, too, have suffered an injustice.” He saw a person with unbound hair and a red headscarf, dressed in a green robe under willow-leaf armor, and wearing shiny black boots. In his hand was a writ of accusation, and every single word that came out of
 
his mouth was “injustice” or “wronged.” When Zhongxiang asked him for his name, he replied, “I am Peng Yue. I was appointed King of Great Liang and was one of the liege lords under the command of Gaozu of the Han who, together with Han Xin, established the Han. But when peace finally reigned throughout the world, there was no further need for me either. I was tricked into coming to the capital where I was minced into a meat paste and fed to the liege lords throughout the empire. That is the wrong I have suffered.”
Zhongxiang accepted his statement.
Then he saw yet another, also holding a statement in his hand who shouted that he too had suffered injustice. Zhongxiang saw that this man wore a lionhead helmet, a green battle dress under dragon scale armor, and green boots. When asked for his name, Bu replied, “I am a vassal of Gaozu of the Han, and my name is Ying Bu. I was appointed as King of Jiujiang. The three of us— Han Xin, Peng Yue, and I—established the empire of Han: twelve emperors who have reigned for more than two hundred years. Such was our great merit! But in a time of peace they had no use for me either and Gaozu cunningly betrayed the three of us, tricked us into entering the palace, and had us all killed. Such are the wrongs we have suffered. May Your Majesty act on behalf of the three of us.”
The emperor grew furious [3a] and asked the eight men, “Where is that Gaozu of the Han?”
“Your Majesty has only to summon him,” they replied.
“Do that now,” said the emperor.
They transmitted his sagely order and summoned Gaozu of the Han. In no
time at all the latter arrived in front of the steps and threw himself prostrate on the ground. Zhongxiang interrogated him as follows, “The accusations of these three people are all the same. Han Xin, Peng Yue, and Ying Bu established the empire of the Han, but you cunningly accused them of rebellion and had them killed. What kind of principle is that?”
Gaozu replied, “The Yunmeng Hills have thousands of sights, so I went there to amuse myself. Empress Lü was temporarily in charge of the country and I have no idea whether these people rebelled or not. Please summon the empress dowager and we’ll see what the truth is.”
When the empress dowager had been summoned, had made her bows below the steps, and had wished Zhongxiang a myriad years, he interrogated her as follows, “When you were temporarily in charge of the country, you cunningly accused these three men of rebellion and intentionally slew these meritorious officials. What should be your punishment?”
The empress dowager glared at Gaozu and said, “Your Majesty,14 when you had become lord in charge of the mountains of rivers and of the altars of earth

Sima Zhongxiang’s Karmic Dream 7
and grain,15 I said to Your Majesty, ‘At present peace reigns, so why are you so unhappy?’ And your sagely intent was thus expressed, ‘You don’t know what’s bothering me. The Hegemon-King had a roaring and booming voice but these three men pursued him until he slit his throat at Raven River. These three are like sleeping tigers—what shall We do once they awaken? Now We will leave for Yunmeng to amuse ourselves, leave you to temporarily act as emperor, and you can trick these three into coming to the palace where you can do away with them.’ Your Majesty, why don’t you confess to this now instead of blaming everything on your lowly handmaid?”
Zhongxiang asked Gaozu, “These three men did not rebel but were deliberately murdered. Why don’t you submit a confession?”
“Your Majesty,” said Empress Lü, “it’s not my word alone. There is still another witness.”
When Zhongxiang asked who that was, she said, “That would be Kuai Che, also known as Wentong. If Your Majesty summons him, you will get to the bottom of it.”
After Kuai Wentong was summoned, arrived at the hall, and finished his dutiful ritual obligations, Zhongxiang asked, “Did these three men rebel? You are the witness!”
Wentong replied, “There is a poem that describes this. The poem goes,
How pitiable, that lord of Huaiyin— Capable of sharing the anxieties of Gaozu:
The Three Qin were rolled up like a mat,
And Yan and Zhao vanquished in a snap.
At night he dammed up a river with sacks of sand;16 In daylight he decapitated the rebel vassal.17
But because Gaozu was neither firm nor resolute Empress Lü decapitated the liege lords all.
After each of their confessions had been taken, Zhongxiang wrote a memorial to inform the Lord of Heaven. The Lord of Heaven immediately dispatched a
  
to carry out the will of Heaven. That edict of the Jade Emperor read:
For Zhongxiang to note:
Gaozu of the Han betrayed his meritorious ministers, so We will have these three men share the empire of the Han: Let Han Xin take as his share the Central Plain and become Cao Cao; let Peng Yue become Liu Bei in Sichuan; let Ying Bu take as his share the area east of the River and, as King Wu of Changsha, become Sun Quan. Gaozu will be reborn in Xuchang and become Emperor Xian, and Empress Lü will become his wife, Empress Fu. Let Cao Cao occupy the Moment of Heaven, imprison Emperor Xian, and kill Empress Fu to take revenge. East of the River let Sun Quan occupy the Advantages of Earth—all those many mountains and rivers! Let Liu Bei in Sichuan occupy the Harmony of Men. Liu Bei will be able enlist the courage of Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, but he will need a man of cunning and strategy. Let Kuai Wentong be reborn in Jizhou (which is Langya Commandery) as Zhuge Liang, also known as Kongming. His name in the Dao will be Master Sleeping Dragon and he will build himself a hermitage and live on Sleeping Dragon Ridge in Dengzhou in Nanyang. This place will be where lord and vassals unite and together establish their state. They will proceed to Yizhou in Sichuan where they will establish their capital and reign as emperors for over fifty years. Let Zhongxiang be reborn in the world of light as Sima Zhongda. He will gather in all three kingdoms and rule alone over the subcelestial realm.
Thus ends the verdict of the Lord of Heaven.
The Origin of the Yellow Scarves19
Now we will speak about something else. Right now, in the year in which Emperor Ling of the Han has ascended the throne, bronze and iron both rang out. The emperor, startled, asked his high ministers, “Has such a thing ever happened in past?”
 
The Origin of the Yellow Scarves 9
The Prime Minister Huangfu Song stepped forward from the ranks and replied, “This has happened twice from the ancient times of Pangu to the present. Long ago in the Spring and Autumn period, when the Son of Heaven, who was King of Qi, ascended the throne, bronze and iron rang out for three days and nights. The King of Qi then asked his great ministers,‘What good or bad fortune is foretold by this ringing of bronze and iron?’ He asked three times but all of the high ministers were silent. The King of Qi was furious and summoned the grandee Ran Qing,‘You are a grandee, why is it you cannot explain this? I will set a term of three days for you; you must reveal the fortune it signals, good or bad.’ The King of Qi did in fact not receive his ministers in audience for three days.
“But, when Ran Qing returned home, he was deeply depressed and unhappy. A family tutor at his mansion noticed the sorrowful expression on his face and asked the grandee,‘Why are you so unhappy?’ The grandee answered,‘Teacher, I will tell you. All the bronze and iron in the world are ringing, and when my lord and king asked me whether this predicted good fortune or bad, I truly had no idea. Now the King of Qi has given me a time limit of three days, and if I do not come up with an answer I will be charged with a crime.’ [4a] The teacher replied, ‘This is easy!’ The great grandee exclaimed, ‘If you know the answer, you will be appointed to office and receive a substantial reward. What of the fortune, good or bad, of this affair?’ The teacher replied,‘It doesn’t predict any good fortune or bad. It only predicts that a mountain will collapse.’ ‘How do you know?’ The teacher explained, ‘Bronze and iron are the offspring of the mountains and mountains are the progenitors of bronze and iron.’
“The great grandee Ran got the meaning and immediately went to court to report to the King of Qi. The latter assembled his ministers, and grandee Ran stepped forward from the ranks and reported,‘The ringing of bronze and iron does not predict any fortune, good or bad.’ The King of Qi asked,‘What?’ He replied,‘It predicts that a mountain will collapse.’ The ruler asked,‘How do you know?’ And he reported, ‘Bronze and iron are the offspring of the mountains, and the mountains are the progenitors of bronze and iron. It is neither lucky nor unlucky.’ The King of Qi was highly pleased and promoted Ran Qing to higher office and rank, to be held by his sons and grandsons without interruption. Only a few days after Ran Qing had reported to the throne, one of the peaks of Flowery Mountain collapsed. So, Your Majesty, this affair does not predict good fortune and does not predict misfortune.”
It was no more than a few days after he had finished speaking that a memorial arrived from Yunzhou, stating that a hole had appeared at the foot of Mt. Tai, as big as a cartwheel and of unknown depth. The court dispatched an emissary to investigate whether this was a lucky or unlucky event.

Let us now talk about something else. At some distance from this hole there was a mountain house, the mountain retreat of Old Master Sun. The Old Master had two sons, the elder of whom took charge of the farm, and the younger of whom studied his letters. He was going to be schoolteacher Sun, but he suddenly contracted leprosy: all his hair fell out and his body never stopped oozing pus and blood. The stench offended his father and mother, and that’s why they built him a thatched hut more than a hundred paces behind the farm.
His wife brought him his food each day. Now one day, his wife brought him food early in the morning. It was the third month of spring and when she arrived at the door of his hermitage and saw the full extent of his illness, she could not bear to look at him. Covering her mouth and nose with her hands, she gave him his food but leaned away from him.
The schoolteacher heaved a sigh and said, “A wife is supposed to share your house when alive and your coffin when you’re dead. But—if even my wife can’t stand me when I’m alive, how much less can others? What’s the point of living even a day longer?”
After he had finished speaking and his wife had gone away, he came to the conclusion that he should find a place to die. He took the crutch he used in his illness, and put on his pusand blood-stained shoes. After going twenty or thirty steps straight north from his hut, [4b] he saw a hole. He put down the staff, took off his shoes, and straightaway jumped into it. But inside the hole it seemed like someone carried him on his back and laid him on the ground. He completely lost consciousness. After a long time, he suddenly came to and opened his eyes to have a look; straight above him he saw one dot of blue sky.
Theschoolteachersaid,“AmomentagoIwasdesperatetokillmyself,Inever expected I would escape death!”
After a time in utter darkness, he gradually saw a bright light straight north of him. About ten paces after he started walking in that direction, he saw a staff of white jade. But when he tried to take hold of it, it turned out only to be two leaves of a gate standing ajar. When he pushed that grotto gate open with his shoulder, it was as bright as day. He saw a stone mat and sat down on it to rest for a while. Tired, he lay down on the stone mat and fell asleep. But when he suddenly stretched himself out, his feet touched something soft. And when he arose with a start, what did he see? Doomed to an end was the four-hundredyear-old empire of Han, just because this schoolteacher reached this very spot!
The schoolteacher saw a huge python, a motionless coil—from fat head to tapered tail—three foot tall. Immediately that python escaped into the grotto. The schoolteacher followed the snake inside the cave, and although he didn’t see the snake, he did see a stone casket. He lifted the lid of the box with his hands and found one scroll of text. He took it out and read it from beginning to end. It turned out to be a text to cure all 404 diseases. It made no use of the eight

The Origin of the Yellow Scarves 11
kinds of eight herbs of the Divine Husbandman. It did not involve refining, matching, or curing with heat. Nothing was turned into pills or powders. No activants were used to get it down. On every page were prescriptions for cures; for every kind of symptom all you needed was a cup of water over which the correct incantation had been spoken—you would be cured as soon as you swallowed that! When he came to the passage on leprosy, the method prescribed was a famous prescription for treating the disease of our schoolteacher. When he saw this, he was filled with joy. He took the heavenly book with him, left through the grotto gate, and sat down on the stone mat.
Now our tale divides again. When the wife of the schoolteacher brought his food again, she couldn’t find the schoolteacher. She came back and informed her father-in-law and he immediately set out with the elder son and others to search. When they came to the hole, they saw his staff and his pusand bloodcovered shoes. The father and mother, elder brother, and wife circled around the pit, weeping. After some time they could hear someone calling from the pit. They fetched a rope and lowered it into the hole with a branch at its end to save the schoolteacher. When he appeared from the pit and father and son saw each other, they were deeply moved. [5a] When they were done crying, the schoolteacher said, “Father, don’t be sad and anxious anymore. I found a heavenly book that will cure my symptoms.” They immediately returned to the farm together. He took one cup of pure water and swallowed it into his stomach when he finished reciting the incantation. His leprosy was immediately cured, and his hair and skin went back to their original state! Later, no matter the distance, people came to seek treatment and every one was cured. They offered him as a contribution for his services cash and goods worth more than twenty thousand strings20 and he ordained roughly five hundred or more disciples.
One of these was called Zhang Jue. One day he took his leave from his teacher, “My old mother back at home is advanced in years, so I request a leave of absence in order to take care of her.”
The schoolteacher replied, “When you leave I will give you a book with famous prescriptions, so it doesn’t matter if you don’t come back.”
The teacher instructed Zhang Jue, “With these famous prescriptions you will cure all complaints and diseases in the empire; but never ask people for money. Abide by my words.”
After Zhang Jue had left his teacher and returned home, he treated diseases in all places he passed through; everyone was cured but he never asked for money. Zhang Jue said, “If I cure you, all of your young and adult males will follow me as my disciples—there is no claim on the old.”
 
Zhang Jue roamed through the four directions and ordained more than a hundred thousand disciples. He recorded their surnames and names and their places of registration, and also the cyclical year, month, and day of their birth. “If I want you for a mission, when that written notification arrives report with the speed of fire. And all of my disciples must abide by the meeting time. Anyone who does not come upon receiving the notification will certainly die. All those who do not follow me will be visited by disaster!”
So suddenly, on that day the Yellow Scarves rose in revolt against the Han, Zhang Jue’s notifications were dispatched throughout the whole world and within a few days his disciples had all arrived at Zhang Family Village, thirty li to the east of the capital of Guangning Commandery in Yangzhou Prefecture. Zhang Jue and two of his nephews gathered the whole in this village, and when they had all assembled, he shouted, “You two younger brothers bring them over here!”
The two younger brothers brought out four bundles, and when these were opened in front of Zhang Jue, they were filled with yellow scarves, which they distributed to the troops and the captains wore . . . Yellow Scarves. Zhang Jue instructed his troops as follows, “Today the empire of the Han dynasty is bound to end and I am bound to rise. If one day I will be lord, the greatest soldiers will be appointed as princes, the lesser ones will be appointed as marquises, and even the bottom rung will be appointed as prefects.”
When this meeting was over, they had no armor or weapons at all. In the beginning they all wore soft battle clothing and carried only rakes and [5b] clubs. But the leaders, Zhang Jue and the two others, led these one hundred thousand men and first took Yangzhou to provide battle dress and armor, bows and swords, saddles and horses, and all other weapons.
Setting out with their army, they started from Guangning Commandery in Yangzhou Prefecture. Whenever they came upon some village, they took that village; whenever they came upon some district, they took that district—they took countless counties and prefectures. Whenever they came to a place, whole families were enlisted in their rebellion. Those who did not comply were either killed, conquered, or enslaved. Occupying two-thirds of the Han empire, the Yellow Scarves had amassed three hundred sixty thousand people in total.
Here our tale divides. One day Emperor Ling of the Han received his ministers in audience and deliberated with the high ministers, saying, “Now the Yellow Scarves number three hundred and sixty thousand in total. What is to be done?”
Huangfu Song stepped forward from the ranks and reported, “This humble minister now makes this request,‘Your Majesty, if you will accept my three conditions, the Yellow Scarves will disappear by themselves.’”

The Oath in the Peach Garden 13
When the emperor asked which three conditions, he replied, “The first condition is that you promulgate throughout the empire an edict of pardon for all violent criminals who rose in rebellion and gathered in the mountain forests, who attacked and plundered fortified cities; secondly for all those who killed or harmed imperial officials, attacked or robbed granaries and storehouses, and wounded or harmed the common people; and thirdly for all those who are willing on their own initiative to leave the Yellow Scarves to become good subjects of the state—but should they not leave the Yellow Scarves, they will be slain along with their whole family.”
The emperor said, “We will follow your proposal and on the day the proclamation of pardon arrives, all will be pardoned and forgiven.”
Huangfu Song also reported, “At present the troops of the Han dynasty are weak, their officers few, whereas the Yellow Scarves are so powerful in numbers they cannot be defeated. Your Majesty can summon a volunteer army throughouttheempire,promisingthemhighofficeandgreatrewards.Youshouldalso appoint a grand marshal, and provide him with blank patents of office21 and great rewards for the troops.‘When great rewards are offered, men of courage will come forward.’”
When the emperor asked, “Who should be the grand marshal?” the answer was, “If there is someone else who can be grand marshal, then hand the seal of office to him, but if there is no one else, I myself will go.”
The emperor said, “Well, then you take the seal.”
He provided him with blank patents of office and treasure, and made him commander of the one hundred thousand men of the Imperial Guard. He gave a royal order, “Even though you lack the Simurgh Conveyance,22 act at your own discretion, as if it were Us in person.”
After Huangfu Song had received the golden seal and had become grand marshal, he took his leave of the emperor and left the court leading his army.
The Oath in the Peach Garden
Hereourtaledivides. Apoemreads,
The dangerous tilt of the house of Han was surely serious,
The rebellious chaos of the Yellow Scarves spread all over the East. If it hadn’t been for the lawless deeds of these bandit traitors, How could those “true beams to support heaven” have ever appeared?
  
The story goes that there was a man named [6a] Guan Yu, also known as Yunchang. He hailed from Xieliang in Puzhou in Pingyang. From birth he had the eyebrows of a god and the eyes of a phoenix, a curly beard and face like purple jade; he was nine feet, two inches tall23 and loved to read the Springs and Autumns and Zuo’s Commentary. When he studied the biographies of rebellious vassals and evil sons, he was filled with a furious hatred. He killed a district magistrate because the latter coveted wealth and loved kickbacks and greatly harmed the common people. Fleeing for his life he became a fugitive and went to Zhuo Commandery.
If he would not have fled for his life, drifting and roaming about, How would he have met friends who prized righteousness over gold?
The story goes that there was a man named Zhang Fei, also known as Yide, who hailed from Fanyang in Zhuo Commandery, in the princedom of Yan. From birth he had the head of a panther and round eyes, the jowls of a swallow, and the whiskers of a tiger; his body was more than nine feet tall, and his voice resounded like a huge bell. He came from a very rich family. Because he was idly standing outside, he saw Lord Guan pass through the streets: his physique was extraordinary, but his clothes were in tatters—he was not a local man. So he stepped forward and greeted Lord Guan with a bow, which the latter returned.
Fei asked him, “Sir, where are you going? And where are you from?” As Lord Guan was being questioned by Fei, he saw that Fei too had an exceptional physique, and said, “I hail from Xiezhou in Hedong. Because the local magistrate treated the people most cruelly, I killed him. Not daring to stay in my village, I came to this place to seek safety.” When Fei heard this tale, he realized that Lord Guan had the ambition of a true man, and invited him to a wineshop. Fei ordered up some wine, “Bring us two hundred coins worth of wine.” The owner brought it promptly.
Lord Guan saw that Fei was a serious person. As they were talking and speaking, they were in complete harmony. When the wine was finished, Lord Guan wanted to buy the next round, but he had no money with him and looked uncomfortable about it. Fei said, “How could that be?” And he ordered the owner to bring more wine. The two of them toasted each other, and as they were talking found themselves in such harmony that they resembled old friends. Indeed:
The day that dragon and tiger meet with each other Is the time when lord and vassal happily unite.
 
The Oath in the Peach Garden 15
Let us begin to speak about a man named Liu Bei, also known as Xuande. He hailed from Fanyang in Zhuo Commandery and was the worthy seventeenthgeneration great-grandson of Emperor Jingdi of the Han and a descendant of Liu Sheng, the Quiet Prince of Zhongshan. From birth he had a dragon face, an aquiline nose, the eyes of a phoenix, the back of Yu, and the shoulders of Tang;24 his body was seven feet, five inches tall, and his hands hung down below his knees. When he was speaking, joy or [6b] anger never showed on his face, and he loved to befriend heroes. As a child he had lost his father; he lived with his mother and made a living by weaving mats and plaiting sandals. At the southeastern corner of his house a mulberry tree grew above the fence. It was more than fifty feet tall. If you had a look at it from close up you saw the various layers of leaves resembled the canopy of a little carriage. Passersby all marveled at the exceptional nature of this tree, which was bound to produce a man destined for greatness. When Xuande was still a child he would play below this tree with other children in the family, and say, “I am the Son of Heaven, and this is the Great Audience Hall.”
When his uncle Liu Deran noticed him uttering these words, he said, “Don’t wipe out our family with light-hearted words!”
Deran’s father was Yuanqi, and Yuanqi’s wife said, “He has his own family. Chase him away from our gates.”
“But,” said Yuanqi, “If our family has such a boy, he is surely no common person. Don’t speak such words!” When the boy turned fifteen, his mother had him travel and study, and he studied at the house of Lu Zhi, the former prefect of Jiujiang, whom he honored as his teacher. But Lord Liu did not like the study of books very much; he loved dogs and horses and fine clothes, and was fond of music.
On this day, after he had plaited his sandals and gone to the market and had sold them, he also came into this wineshop to buy a drink. When Guan and Zhang saw the extraordinary physique of Lord Liu and his thousand kinds of indescribable blessings, Lord Guan offered him a drink. When Lord Liu saw that these two people also had exceptional physiques, he was very pleased and did not reject the offer, but took the cup and promptly drank it. When he had finished it, Zhang Fei offered him a cup, which he also accepted and finished. Fei invited him to sit with them, and after they had finished three cups of wine, the three of them stayed together as though old friends united in harmony.
But Zhang Fei said, “This is no place for us to sit. If you two gentlemen have no objection, let’s go to my place and have a drink.” When the two of them heard this, they promptly followed Fei to his house. In the back there was a peach orchard, and in that orchard there was a little pavilion. Fei thereupon
 
invited the two of them and brought wine to the pavilion, where the three of them happily drank. While they were drinking, each told his age: Lord Liu was the eldest, Lord Guan was the next, and Fei was the youngest. And so the eldest became the eldest brother, and the youngest the youngest brother. They slaughtered a white horse in sacrifice to Heaven, and killed a black ox in sacrifice to Earth. They did not find it necessary to be born on the same day, but they vowed to die on the same day. The three of them would be inseparable in walking, sitting, and sleeping. They swore to be brothers.
Lord Liu saw that the situation of the Han dynasty was as perilous as piledup eggs: robbers and bandits arose in swarms and the common people suffered distress. [7a] He said with a sigh, “Should a real man live like this in this world?” Time and again they discussed how they could save the common people from this terrible situation, and how they could free the Son of Heaven from his powerless situation. They saw traitorous ministers ignore orders and bandits manipulate power, and were filled with indignation!
Because dragon and tigers are filled with love and righteousness, Evil sons and slanderous ministers are startled from their sleep.
Let us speak now instead about that one day Zhang Fei informed his two elder brothers, “At present the Yellow Scarves rebels are spreading everywhere, plundering the people’s money, and stealing their wives and daughters. If these rebels come here, I may be very rich, but I won’t be able to do anything about it.”
Xuande said, “So what should we do in such a situation?”
Fei said, “The best for us is to inform the Prince of Yan and hire some volunteer soldiers. Then what do we have to fear even if these rebels show up?”
Xuande and Lord Guan said, “Such an action makes sense.” And so they got on their horses, left Zhang’s home, and came to discuss the situation with the Prince of Yan.
In a snap of the fingers they had reached the steps before the palace of the Prince of Yan, but when they dismounted, they were barred from entering by the gatekeeper. Zhang Fei said, “I’ve come here for the very purpose of seeing the prince as I have something to discuss with him.”
The gatekeeper replied, “Just wait here for a while and let me inform the prince.” The gatekeeper reached the front of the main hall and stated, “There’s someone outside the palace who wants to discuss something with you, my prince.”
The Prince of Yan said, “Ask him in.” Zhang Fei immediately followed the gatekeeper into the hall, and the Prince of Yan granted Zhang Fei a seat.
The Prince of Yan asked, “What is your business?”

The Campaign against the Yellow Scarves 17
“The Yellow Scarves,” replied Zhang Fei, “are now spreading all over the world. Should they come to this city and it is completely unprepared, wouldn’t they trample the capital of Yan to dust?”
The Prince of Yan replied, “That may be so, but the government storehouse is without money and the official granaries are empty, so I lack the food and fodder to provision an army. And who could be their leader?”
Zhang Fei said, “Even though I am only a lowly subject under your command,25 I do have a bit of family property that can be used to provide for troops.”
“But,” replied the Prince of Yan, “even if we could summon some volunteers, whom could we appoint as their leader?”
Zhang Fei said, “There’s someone staying at my place whose name is Liu Bei and he is also known as Xuande. He is a descendant of Liu Sheng, the Quiet Prince of Zhongshan. This man was born with a dragon’s nose and a phoenix’s eyes; his ears hang down below his shoulders and his hands hang down beyond his knees. He can be the leader.”
The Prince of Yan immediately issued an order to raise the flag for summoning volunteers. Their leader was Liu Xuande, and under him served Guan Yunchang, Zhang Yide, Mei Fang, Jian Xianhe, and Sun Qian. [7b] Within a month they had summoned an army of three thousand five hundred volunteers.
The Campaign against the Yellow Scarves
The Prince of Yan was out one day with Liu Bei training troops on the parade grounds. When the Prince of Yan inspected them he saw that all of the troops and officers they had raised were strong and each of them was dauntingly brave. The Prince of Yan was very pleased. But at the main gate someone showed up who reported, “Disaster!”
Youzhou Commandery summoned braves who raised buckle and spear: The mutinous Yellow Scarves had come to seek out their own deaths.
When the Prince of Yan asked, “What kind of disaster?” the answer was, “Right now the Yellow Scarves are only a hundred li from this city and have come to take Youzhou.”
The Prince of Yan said, “Leader of the volunteers, what shall we do?”
 
“My lord, don’t worry,” said Xuande, “I want to lead this army out to defeat the Yellow Scarves.” Having said this, Xuande took his leave of the Prince of Yan and led the troops they had raised thirty li out of the city where they stationed themselves.
Xuande sat down in his tent and asked, “Who dares go forth to find out the strength of the bandit troops?” Before he had even finished speaking Zhang Fei, in front of the tent, spoke out, “I will. I want to go alone!”
Xuande replied, “Go, brother, but be careful!” When he had said this, Zhang Fei mounted his horse and left the camp.
In no time at all, Zhang Fei returned and dismounted from his horse in front of the tent, and reported, “Right now the Son of Heaven has sent out the grand marshal, Huangfu Song, with a writ of pardon. If there are any who have committed a crime, but who will summon troops and buy horses and dare defeat the Yellow Scarves, they will be given the seal of vanguard. And once they will have annihilated the Yellow Scarves, they will be appointed to office and given rewards. Brother, so my proposal is this: here we rely only on the lord of a single commandery, so it would be much better to join the grand marshal of the Han and spend our efforts on behalf of the state. Fighting in the east and extirpating in the west, conquering in the south and campaigning in the north, we will manifest our merit in the present and leave a name for the future.”
When Xuande had heard Zhang Fei’s words he was very pleased and immediately led the men under his command out of camp to welcome the grand marshal.
When the grand marshal arrived at the tent, he said, “Now the Son of Heaven pardons all of you for the crime of raising an army of volunteers. If you defeat the Yellow Scarves, you will be promptly given high office and rich reward.” After he said this, the grand marshal granted Xuande a seat. Guan Yu, Zhang Fei, and the others were just about to depart.26 And when the grand marshal noticed the heroic looks of Xuande, Guan, and Zhang, he was greatly pleased. “With such heroes as these, I see the Yellow Scarves traitors as no more than grass or weeds.” The grand marshal immediately told Xuande to assume the seal of vanguard and then dispatched fast riders to go and determine [8a] the strength of the Yellow Scarves.
When the spies returned they reported, “The major force of the bandit troops are in Xiqing Prefecture in Yanzhou, and their five hundred thousand men are stationed in two places. Three hundred thousand are in Yanzhou. In Apricot-Forest Village, thirty li from Yanzhou, two leaders, called Zhang Bao and Zhang Biao, are in charge of the other two hundred thousand.” The grand
 
The Campaign against the Yellow Scarves 19
marshal ordered the vanguard to lead fifty thousand troops to assess the real situation in Xiqing Prefecture.27
“I don’t need fifty thousand,” replied Liu Bei. “Using only the three thousand five hundred men now under my command, I will go first to Rencheng District and there make camp.” The grand marshal’s major force followed behind and also made camp in Rencheng District.
The grand marshal once again asked his officers who would be willing to go and find out the actual situation and persuade the bandits to surrender. Liu Bei said, “I am the vanguard now and I want to go.” He was immediately provided with proclamations of pardon. When Liu Bei had been provided with these pardons, he took his leave of the grand marshal and led his own troops to the eastern gate of the district capital of Rencheng, where he made his way across the river to go to Ban Village. Xuande asked, “How far is it from here to Apricot-Forest Village?” “About fifteen li.” Xuande then asked his troops, “Who can take this proclamation of pardon to Apricot-Forest Village and invite Zhang Biao to surrender?” As soon as he had finished speaking, Zhang Fei replied, “I want to go.” “How many troops do you need?” “I don’t need any,” Zhang Fei replied, “I will go alone. I’ll take the proclamation of pardon to Apricot-Forest Village and invite Zhang Biao to surrender.”
So Zhang Fei departed, a single rider on a single horse. When he reached Apricot-Forest Village, soldiers guarding the gate tried, but were unable, to block his way and he proceeded straight to the commander’s tent in the middle of the army, where he halted his horse and rested his lance across his saddle. Over fifty people were seated in that tent, and the one sitting in the middle was Zhang Biao. Around the tent over five hundred men readied their lances. Zhang Biao and his men were all surprised and Zhang Biao asked, “Who are you? Perhaps a spy?” Zhang Fei replied, “I am not a spy. I am a simple soldier in the vanguard command of the grand marshal of the Han. I didn’t come here for any private business, but I bring you the sagely edict of the emperor and a proclamation of pardon. Even if you have committed the most defiant of crimes, plotting rebellion, or have killed officials appointed by the Son of Heaven, you will all be pardoned. If you join the Han, take off your Yellow Scarves, and raise the flags of our state, your sons will be ensured an appointment and your wife will be ennobled, and you will receive a high office and great rewards. But if you don’t join us, you will all be slaughtered.”
When Zhang Biao heard this, [8b] he was furious and ordered his underling to immediately set to . . . and they all came forward at once to try and stab Zhang Fei. He paid them no heed but firmly closed his fingers on the end of his eighteen-foot lance and twirled it in a circle so none of these troops could
 
approach him. Who knows how many lances and bucklers of the bandit troops he snapped? The bandit troops in the camp cried out, and, frightened and scared, scattered on their own. On his single horse Zhang Fei moved at liberty through the bandit army and not a single one dared oppose him. Then the bandit troops heard the sounds of gongs and drums, and Zhang Biao saw someone report at the tent, “Your Majesty, a disaster!” Zhang Biao asked, “What kind of disaster?” “The vanguard of the Han has been divided into six companies of five hundred men each. With their bronze drums banging wildly, banners waving and troops yelling, they have captured the gate and are bursting into the camp.” Zhang Biao led his troops as fast as he could in a mass flight to Yanzhou. The Han troops followed in hot pursuit for over fifty li.
Xuande then collected his troops, returned to Apricot-Forest Village, and made camp. He ordered his soldiers to guard the gates of the camp and then he checked on his officers. When he asked how far his troops had chased those bandit troops, the answer was, “They all entered the city of Yanzhou. The old and young were abandoned and we killed them all.” Xuande then sent a report to the grand marshal and told him to hasten to Apricot-Forest Village. When the grand marshal saw the report, he was very pleased and immediately led his troops to Apricot-Forest Village. Liu Bei received the grand marshal and they sat together in the tent for a banquet.28 The grand marshal issued an order, “All of the the troops of the vanguard and the officers and leaders under the command of the grand marshal shall be rewarded.”
As they were banqueting, a spy arrived before the tent to report, “Zhang Biao just entered Yanzhou and has combined his troops with those of Zhang Bao; they have a huge force.” When the spy had finished, the grand marshal issued an order, “Who dares take Yanzhou?” “I want to go,” Xuande replied. The grand marshal was very pleased, “Since the bandit army is huge in numbers, and ‘a few are no match for a crowd,’ you should take some additional troops with you.” But Liu Bei said, “I don’t need many troops. It will suffice to take only a mixed troop of brave soldiers under my command.” “Then go,” replied the grand marshal, “but be careful.”
Xuande immediately took his leave from the grand marshal and, provided with proclamations of pardon, rushed off to Yanzhou. At a distance of some tenlifromYanzhouhemadecamp.Xuandeasked,“Whowilltaketheseproclamations of pardon and invite Zhang Biao and Zhang Bao to surrender?” Zhang Fei replied, “I want to go!” Xuande asked, [9a] “How many troops will you need?” “I will not need a single one,” Zhang Fei replied, “I will go alone.” But Xuande said, “I’m afraid something might go wrong. You should take five hundred troops with you.” “No need,” said Zhang Fei, and he repeated, “No need.”
 
The Campaign against the Yellow Scarves 21
Liu Bei said, “Then take a few less.” Zhang Fei then said, “I am summoning those of you who willingly volunteer. If you follow me, the sons and grandsons of those who attain success will enjoy a state salary forever.” At his first call, he got seven men and seven horses; at his second call he got three men and three horses; and at his third call he got two men and two horses, so all together they were thirteen, and he said, “This is enough.”
Zhang Fei led the thirteen to Yanzhou, bearing the proclamations of pardon. When they arrived outside the city wall, Zhang Fei had a good look at the wall and moat, and the war towers and battle sheds on the wall. “Deer antlers” had been buried deep in the earth29 and the moat had been dredged. On top of the wall he saw “rolling logs”30 and catapult stones were everywhere; the drawbridge was drawn up and the slide gates were lowered. From outside the city wall Zhang Fei loudly called out, “Who’s up there? Let’s talk!” After he spoke, a group of soldiers on the wall engaged in conversation with him, and asked, “Who are you, soldier?” Zhang Fei replied, “I am Zhang Fei, a soldier of the vanguard general under the command of the grand marshal of the Han.” And he asked the man on the wall, “Who are you?” “I am the captain that holds Yanzhou, Zhang Bao.” Zhang Fei said, “I am now bringing proclamations of pardon. If you surrender, you will be pardoned and everyone will be spared punishment, appointed to an office, promoted in rank, and richly rewarded. But if you do not surrender, you all will be massacred together.” When Zhang Bao heard this he was enraged and immediately wanted to open the gate and engage him in battle.
But Zhang Biao said, “No way! When I was at Apricot-Forest Village, this guy rode right into my camp on a single horse; none of my troops could stop him. That’s why Apricot-Forest Village was lost.” When Zhang Bao asked, “What should we do in this case?” “Seal the gates tight,” answered Zhang Biao, “And don’t go outside, lest Zhang Fei have some trick up his sleeve. Let’s send a written report to Yangzhou to ask for relief.” Zhang Fei yelled out at the foot of the wall, but the people on top kept silent. A furious Zhang Fei circled the city cursing them loudly, but nobody reacted. He made another circuit and reached the south gate, where he shouted from the foot of the wall, “Who is guarding the gate?” But again nobody reacted.
When Zhang Fei saw no response, he said to his troops, [9b] “From the time we became soldiers of the Han, our saddles have never left our horses, and our armor has never left our bodies; pillowing on our bows, the sand was imprinted with moons, sleeping in our armor, the earth grew scales. On bitter campaigns in fierce battles, grappling with the enemy to see who lives or dies, we have really suffered! But today, we reach these willow trees here by the moat.
 
Let us shed our armor in the willows’ shade, and bathe in the city moat while our horses rest under the trees.” While doing so, Zhang Fei pointed to those on the city wall and cursed them once again.
Zhang Biao became enraged and, seeing that Zhang Fei was bathing in the city moat leaving man and horse unprepared, said to his elder brother, “If I do not kill this lout now, would I be capable of dying without shame?” His elder brother Bao said, “We have roughly five hundred thousand troops and a thousand officers. With a hundred thousand troops at its head, our army has rampaged throughout the world and no one dared oppose us. We have occupied two-thirds of the world of the Han. Look, soon all the land will belong to us. Today Zhang Fei appears on the scene. Just because you lost that little camp at Apricot-Forest Village, you are suddenly filled with fear and trepidation. Whether it be the highest general or the lowest of disbanded soldiers, if any among them dare to fight that Zhang Fei, I will give him rich rewards, and to hell with you.” Zhang Biao said, “It was dark in the evening that day, my troops were not dressed in armor, and the horses were not saddled. And there was a great force behind him. That’s why I lost the camp at Apricot-Forest Village. But today that Zhang Fei is one of only thirteen men. After I lead a company of five thousand soldiers, I will surely capture Zhang Fei!” Zhang Bao said, “Younger brother, what you say is absolutely right.”
He immediately took command of five thousand troops, lowered the drawbridge, and came out of the city. When Zhang Fei saw these troops leaving the city, they quickly mounted their horses and while on horseback put on their armor. Each held a weapon as they fled toward the south. They reached Yao Family Village, just forty li short of Yanzhou. Zhang Biao pursued them all the way to Apricot-Forest Village, where he saw a company of soldiers of over a thousand men, and the head general was none other than the vanguard commander Liu Bei. Holding his paired swords and dressed in a brocade battle gown, he halted his horse below his battle flag and shouted, “Who is the captain of these bandit troops?” “I am Zhang Biao!” When Xuande heard this he wheeled his horse and the two men began to fight. After some twenty rounds, five hundred troops launched a surprise attack from the rear. Their leader was Jian Xianhe. In the melee [10a] they inflicted a heavy defeat on Zhang Biao.
Zhang Biao turned his army toward Yanzhou and fled. Behind him, Liu Bei pressed the attack. At his front was a large forest from which another company of soldiers dashed out; there were over a thousand men. Their leader halted his horse and rested his sword across his saddle. Zhang Biao asked in a panic, “Who are you?” “I am just a soldier under the command of the vanguard of the Han, a certain Guan Yunchang.” He went on, “Bandit general, why don’t you dismountfromyourhorseandsurrender?”ZhangBiaowasalarmed.Yunchang came forward with his sword out, and Zhang Biao was even less inclined to meet such an enemy, so he fled by the backroads.

The Campaign against the Yellow Scarves 23
Liu Bei’s troop caught up, and with Lord Guan they quickly dispatched nine-tenths of Zhang Biao’s command leaving behind only a mere hundred or so. The battle continued until evening, moving forward to the walls of Yanzhou. In a panic Zhang Biao shouted, “Open the gate! Behind is an ambush army that is about to overtake us.” On top of the wall, Zhang Bao had the gate opened as fast as fire, and Zhang Biao and his troops, merely fifty or seventy men, entered the city. Outside the moat in the willow grove, Zhang Fei and his troops were lying in ambush and quickly rushed the city. Of Zhang Biao’s troops who were killed, many fell into the water. Leading a hundred men or so, Zhang Fei shouted out, “Cut the cables of the drawbridge!” The whole pursuing army entered the city walls. Zhang Bao and Zhang Biao had no clue how many Han troops there might be, so in their panic they fled in the dark of night, out through the north gate. Yanzhou had been recaptured.
The next day, when the grand marshal had arranged a banquet and while they were deliberating what to do, a spy returned to report that the defeated army had entered Guangning Commandery. The grand marshal said, “Vanguard, tomorrow you lead your troops and go on ahead, then the main body of troops will break camp and we will all go to Yangzhou.” He took the road to Shengzhou, passed by Haizhou, followed the Lian River and forded the Huai, passed Taizhou, and turned west to Yangzhou. The vanguard of Liu Bei arrived together at a place no more than a bowshot from the city, and there they made camp.
Let us speak now of Zhang Biao who did a roll call of his army. When Zhang Bao could not be accounted for since he had died in the melee, Zhang Jue was furious. On top of that a spy arrived to report, “We have discovered that the army of the Han is quite close and the vanguard Liu Bei has made camp a bowshot away from the city wall.” Zhang Jue summoned his officers and gave them explicit instructions, “ Tomorrow the whole army has to empty out the city to go out to confront Liu Bei.”
At daybreak the next day Zhang Jue led his army out. Liu Bei had divided his troops in three companies, and Guan Yu and Zhang Fei each led [10b] one. As soon as first forces arrived, the two armies engaged in battle. Guan Yu suddenly attacked them from the rear and Zhang Fei pressured them from the sides. Liu Bei told his corporals to shout out, “If you bandit troops take off your yellow scarves and throw down your weapons, you will be covered by a pardon. If one of you captures Zhang Jue you will be ennobled as a Five-Hegemon Liege Lord!” As he finished speaking, the army of the grand marshal arrived. When the bandits saw this, they threw down their spears and discarded their armor. Countless numbers took off their yellow scarves and bowed down to submit. Zhang Jue and Zhang Biao died in the melee.

Once Liu Bei had captured Yangzhou, the grand marshal led his army into the city and issued an order to comfort the common people so they would not suffer in the slightest. Anyone who disobeyed would be punished according to military law. So the common people were all happy. The grand marshal also issued this order: that from the vanguard down, all officers and troops should join him for a banquet the next day.
Humiliation at Court and in the Province
The following day all attended the banquet, and the grand marshal said, “My officers, many thanks for all your efforts in defeating the Yellow Scarves.” After giving each man a reward, he wrote a memorial to the court and selected an auspicious date to return with the army. When they arrived at Chang’an, the grand marshal ordered them all to make camp outside the eastern gate. He told Liu Bei, “All of the merit from defeating the Yellow Scarves is yours. After I have had an audience with the emperor, and I will tell him everything about this defeat of the Yellow Scarves, and our lord and king will clearly understand.” “Make camp outside the eastern gate,” he told Liu Bei, “and wait for two or three days.”
One day when Liu Bei was seated with some liege lords, a corporal came to report that an emissary of the Han wanted to see the vanguard. As soon as Liu Bei heard this, he hurried out of the palace gate to welcome him. After this emissary had taken his seat in the central commander’s tent and, when Liu Bei was done with his formal greetings, Liu asked, “Constant Attendant, why are you here?” “Don’t you know who I am? I am one of the Ten Constant Attendants!”31 This person, Duan Gui, went on to berate him, saying, “All of us have discussed this. Lord Xuande, you must have collected a countless number of gold, pearls, and other precious goods when you defeated those Yellow Scarves. If you are willing to offer us three hundred thousand strings’ worth of gold and pearls, we will have you enfeoffed as a marquis with full regalia—your belt will be gold and your gown will be purple.” Liu Bei replied, “I have taken no more than cities and military camps. All the gold and pearls and woven goods were collected by the grand marshal. I never received the slightest portion.” Upon hearing this, Duan Gui abruptly rose to his feet and, after he had taken a few steps, turned his head to glare at Liu Bei, “You starving beggar from Upper-
 
Humiliation at Court and in the Province 25
Mulberry Village! [11a] You have plenty of gold and pearls, but are unwilling to give them to anyone else.” Zhang Fei was enraged, and with flailing fists he stepped right up to Duan Gui, and before Liu Bei and Lord Guan could pull him back by his clothes, his fist hit Duan full on his lips. His back teeth fell out of his mouth and two front teeth were also knocked out. His mouth was filled with blood. Duan Gui went back with his hand covering his mouth. And Liu Bei said to Zhang Fei, “You’ve caused trouble for our men!”
At daybreak the next day, the grand marshal came and invited Liu Bei, “My report has already been submitted to the emperor. The merit is all yours.” He instructed him to wait the next morning in a green robe and with a sophora tablet outside the palace gate for the sagely edict.
Liu Bei went to the palace gate but even after about half a month he still had not been summoned, “I see that all of the generals under the command of the grand marshal have been summoned, have all received an official title, have been rewarded, and have gone to their place of appointment.” But outside lingered Liu Bei, who waited for over a month and still was never summoned. When the three of them were in their own camp, Liu Bei was depressed and eyed Zhang Fei, “That one blow you landed on Duan Gui has implicated the whole troop and brought them suffering.” When he was pondering this, the troops of the Mixed Tiger banner all came to complain to Liu Bei and to say goodbye to Zhang Fei, “We officers all see that those who have merit are never called while those without merit receive rewards. We can wait no longer and each of us will now head back home.” Liu Bei told them, “Every iota of the merit belongs to our army. If troops without merit receive a reward, how much more do we deserve it? The Han emperor will make no mistake in this; he must be computing the greatness of our merit. You should all wait for a few more days.”
The next day, Liu Bei once again went to the palace gate to wait for the sagely edict. When the morning audience was finished and the civil officials and military officers all left through the inner gate, he saw a four-horse carriage with silver bells, gold stupas, and a brown canopy. After Liu Bei shouted “Injustice” three times, the official in that carriage asked, “Who are you, you who are crying that you have suffered an injustice?” Liu Bei stood in front of the carriage and said, “I am the vanguard Liu Bei who defeated the Yellow Scarves.” “And why do you claim that you have suffered an injustice?” Liu Bei replied, “All of the other officers under the command of the grand marshal have received rewards and, after promotion, have gone to their place of appointment. Only I, Liu Bei, and my troops have attended the court for over a month without ever being summoned. Now my soldiers are all starving and are leaving me.” The man in the carriage was Dong Cheng, an imperial relative, the father-in-law of the emperor, and he said, “That’s yet another case of the Ten Constant Attendants creating disorder. Vanguard, please wait outside the inner gate and let me go back to report this to the emperor.”

After some two hours he came back out of the palace and said, “Vanguard, come along with me.” [11b] When they arrived at his house, the emperor’s father-in-law invited Liu Bei to a simple meal. Liu Bei bowed and showed his respects with folded hands as he asked, “Father-in-law of the emperor, may I be allowed to ask what kind of memorial was submitted by the grand marshal?” “Today it was already too late to ask. But tomorrow during the morning audience the high ministers will discuss your case and determine your office and rewards. Tomorrow you will hear the sagely edict.”
The following day when he went again to the palace gate to hear the sagely edict, the Ten Constant Attendants summoned him inside, “The vanguard Liu Bei is called to hear the Sagely Edict!” When Liu Bei had made his bows and had prostrated himself on the ground, he was asked, “How many days have you been without provisions since you arrived here, in Chang’an?” Liu Bei replied, “Thirty-seven days.” “From Chang’an to Dingzhou is only a few days of travel. When you get to Dingzhou, you calculate the total number of days and then ask for provisions. The grain and straw that was earlier not paid out32 will all have to be made up then. Liu Bei will take up the position of defender of Anxi District at Dingzhou. Because the bandits and robbers in the Taihang Mountains are so numerous, you will suppress them with the troops under your own command.”
Liu Bei set out and when he arrived in Dingzhou, he paid his respects to the magistrate of Anxi district; when he visited the county office, a clerk read out his visiting card addressed to the officials of Dingzhou, “The district defender of Anxi district presents himself!” When he arrived before the hall and had barely begun to make his bows, the enraged prefect shouted, “Liu Bei, stop bowing!” He ordered his underlings to grab Liu Bei and said, “Those Yellow Scarves that you failed to defeat are now hiding away in our mountains and fields, terrorizing the common people!” And the prefect also asked, “From here, Chang’an is quite close. How come you have surpassed the set number of days for travel by more than half a month? Soused with wine and proud of your merit you must have thought your office too small and so on purpose have delayed your arrival.” Liu Bei replied, “Prefect, with your permission, three thousand five hundred men with their dependents are roughly twelve thousand people, all pushing carts or carrying loads and carrying their children in their arms. The old and weak also cannot proceed so quickly. So I beg Your Excellency to be merciful, and I will ask for no additional rations at all.” The furious prefect interrogated him again, “One way or another you should have sent the soldiers on ahead first and let the old and young follow behind. Don’t try to worm yourself out of this!” He ordered his underlings to lock him up and

Humiliation at Court and in the Province 27
obtain a confession for “dilatory obstruction.” But the moment he was about to put his brush to paper to formalize his decision, his underlings suggested to Yuan Qiao, “In view of his merit in defeating the Yellow Scarves spare him for the moment from caning!” So he ordered his underlings to drag Liu Bei [12a] around the hall three times, but after the subordinate officials to his left and right had once again pleaded with him, the prefect shouted, “District defender, go back to your own office and be very careful in what you do!”
When Liu Bei arrived at his office and greeted Guan, Zhang, and the other officers, he invited them to the front hall. While they were having their meal and sitting there, Zhang Fei asked Xuande, “Brother, how come you are so distraught? Liu Bei replied, “I have now become a district defender, but it’s only an appointment of the ninth rank. You, Guan, Zhang, and the other officers while in the army defeated over five hundred thousand Yellow Scarves, but whereas I became an official, you, my two brothers, received no office. That’s why I am so distraught.” “Brother, that can’t be the case!” Zhang Fei said, “You were not distraught during the ten days on the road from Chang’an to Dingzhou. So why are you so distraught after coming back from paying your respect at the county? It must be that the prefect treated you badly in some way. Elder brother, you should tell us.” But Xuande didn’t say a word.
After Zhang Fei had left Xuande, he thought, “If I want to know the truth, I will have to make some inquiries.” He went to the back stables where he saw Liu Bei’s two personal attendants, but when he asked them, they refused to tell him anything. After Zhang Fei had questioned them, he flew into a rage. When the second watch came that night, he left the office of the defender with a sharp sabre in his hands. He reached the rear of the county compound, jumped over the wall, and went on. As he reached a flower garden in the back, he saw a woman and asked her, “Where are the sleeping quarters of the prefect? If you don’t tell me I will kill you!” Her body quaking and filled with fear, she said, “The prefect is sleeping in the back room.” “And what are you to the prefect?” “I am the woman who makes his bed.” Zhang Fei said, “Then take me to the back room.”
The woman led Zhang Fei to the back room, where he killed her, and then he also killed the Prefect Yuan Qiao. There was a concubine in the lamplight who cried out, “Murderer!” So he also killed the concubine. But, because of this the yamen night guard was aroused, and about thirty men rushed in to seize Zhang Fei. He slew more than twenty archers, leapt over the rear wall, and escaped, returning to his own compound.
At dawn the next day all of the officials, high and low, called on the District Defender, Liu Bei, to discuss the situation. Liu Bei was determined to pursue the killer and immediately notified the court of his intention. But, the Ten Constant Companions declared, “The murderer who killed the prefect had [12b] to have been someone from the District Defender’s group.”

The court dispatched the Inspector General Cui Lian to go, in the capacity of Censor, to settle in at Dingzhou Posthouse. All officials high and low paid a visit to the envoy and asked him, “Sir, what assignment do you have?” The Inspector General replied, “They have sent me here to question you because of the murder of the magistrate. Is the District Defender here?”
“The District Defender is outside but dares not pay his respects.” The envoy then summoned the District Defender, who entered to make a formal visit with three hundred soldiers, among whom were Guan, Zhang, and twenty or thirty of the defender’s entourage. The envoy said, “Are you the District Defender?” “I am,” replied Liu Bei. “Did you kill the magistrate?” asked the envoy. Liu Bei replied, “The magistrate was in his rear apartments; they were lit by lamps and candles, and there was a night guard of thirty or so men. If you insist that the man who killed twenty or so of the magistrate’s men and then escaped from such a well-lit place must have been Liu Bei, then of course it must have been Liu Bei.”
The Inspector General spoke angrily, “In the past you were the reason that your sworn brother Zhang Fei knocked out Duan Gui’s two front teeth. Today the sage’s directive has sent me here to question you about the magistrate’s killer. Earlier, when you paid your respects at the county, you had failed to arrive within the prescribed number of days allowed for travel. You should have been sentenced for that crime, but out of respect for all of the officers, you were not. Because of this incident you bore resentment and killed the magistrate. So don’t try to wriggle your way out of it!” He shouted to his attendants, “ Take him!”
On either side, Guan Yu and Zhang Fei were enraged, and each ran up into the hall carrying a blade and frightened the host of officials, who all fled. They captured the envoy and stripped him. Zhang Fei helped Liu Bei sit on a chair, and then he bound the envoy to a hitching post at the front of the hall, where he was soon dead after being bastinadoed more than a hundred times. The corpse was split into six sections, the head was hung outside the north gate, and the feet and hands strung from the four corners. Then Liu Bei, Guan Yunchang, Zhang Fei, and all of the generals and troops went to ground in the Taihang Mountains.
The court was informed of this. One day the emperor received his ministers in audience, and asked the civil officials and military officers, “At present there arestillverymanyYellowScarveswhohavenotyetbeendefeated,andnowLiu Bei has rebelled too. What should we do if these two join forces?” The Imperial Father-in-law [13a] Dong Cheng stepped forward from the ranks and said, “MayYourMajestyliveamyriadyears.AtpresentLiuBeihasnotrebelled.Itis all because of the Ten Constant Attendants who measure out on their scales the value of official posts in order to sell them: those who have money and goods become officials, and those who have merit are not rewarded. Your Majesty, if you follow my advice, Liu Bei will not rebel.” The emperor said, “How can we invite Liu Bei to surrender?” “Now kill the Ten Constant Attendants and take

Dong Zhuo and Lü Bu 29
the heads of seven of them to the Taihang Mountains, then you can invite those three brothers to surrender.” The emperor said, “We will follow your advice.” And he asked, “Who can go?” Dong Cheng replied, “I will go.”
While Dong Cheng was going to the Taihang Mountains with the heads of these seven men, he ran into a band of soldiers. Dong Cheng engaged in conversation with these troops, and said, “I bring a sagely edict inviting you to surrender. Because the Ten Constant Attendants squeezed the court and the provinces for money and bribes, carefully calculating profit in order to sell offices, they have been executed and killed. I now bring their heads to show to you brothers, and you are also pardoned for the crimes of killing the prefect and whipping the inspector to death—it’s all covered by the pardon.” Liu Bei prostrated himself on the ground as he listened to the proclamation of pardon. After Liu Bei had expressed his gratitude for the imperial favor, he followed the Imperial Father-in-law back to Chang’an, where he was received in audience by the emperor. The happy emperor gave him rewards and promoted him to office, sending him to be the assistant magistrate of Pingyuan district in Dezhou. The subordinate officials to his left and right also received rewards.
Dong Zhuo and Lü Bu
Because Emperor Ling had passed away, Emperor Xian was immediately elevated as lord. He left Chang’an and established his capital at the Eastern Capital Luoyang. The prime ministers were Wang Yun, Cao Yong, and Ding Jianyang. One day the emperor received his ministers in audience. Wang Yun stepped forward from the ranks and reported to the emperor, “We have received a written report from Xiliang Prefecture that the two Yellow Scarves, Zhang and Li, and two other major miscreants have occupied Xiliang Prefecture with over three hundred thousand troops.” The emperor said, “What should we do now?” And the emperor also asked Wang Yun, “Who dares go?” Wang Yun proposed, “You should summon Dong Zhuo as grand marshal. Dong Zhuo has a courage to which ten thousand men cannot stand up. He is eight feet, five inches tall; he is fat and well muscled and has a huge belly, and can be recommended to capture those bandits.33 When he joins the fray he wears heavy armor, runs as fast as a runaway colt, and sitting, he can snatch a flying swallow right out of the air. He can do the job as grand marshal. Under his command he has a thousand battle-tested officers and he leads over five hundred thousand troops.”
 
The emperor followed his advice and summoned Dong Zhuo to court, where he promoted him in rank and nobility and appointed him as grand master and grand marshal of the empire. The emperor asked Dong Zhuo, “Now [13b] we have received a written notification from Xiliang that over three hundred thousand Yellow Scarves are causing havoc there. Who can defeat them?” Dong Zhuo replied, “I want to go!”
As he was about to set out with his army, they suddenly heard a great commotion inside the city walls. The city gates were closed as, immediately, thousands of soldiers were given their orders. All of the streets in the front and alleys behind were guarded by soldiers who had covered everything like a net-weave that was tied tight at the corners. They saw a man on horseback who looked like a fierce tiger. He set the government troops aflight—who knows how many he killed. The number of troops and officers was increased and increased again, until there were enough to finally subdue this man. The Grand Preceptor Dong Zhuo loudly shouted, “Who are you?” But the man did not answer. The common folk all shouted out at the top of their voices, “This guy is a slave of Ding Jianyang. He just killed Minister Ding and the army subdued him just as he was fleeing on the minister’s horse!” The Grand Preceptor was blessed with more troops and officers and therefore could nab this man; after tying him up they took him to the commander’s headquarters.
Dong Zhuo settled into his seat and then interrogated him, “Just who is the one we just caught? What is your name?” As soon as he had finished speaking came the reply, “I am Lü Bu, also known as Fengxian.” “Why did you kill all the people on the street with your dagger-axe?” He was just about to get into the details when someone from Minister Ding’s household said, “He killed Prime Minister Ding for no other reason than this horse!” When Dong Zhuo asked him what was so special about this horse, this servant of Ding’s replied again, “This horse is out of the ordinary. The spots of blood that appear all over it are bright red, and its manes and tail are like fire, so it is called Red Harrier. The prime minister said that it was not called a red harrier because it was bright red, but it was called a harrier horse because it was used for hunting hares with a bow: when you were riding on dry land and if it sees a hare, it will not start, so there is no need to rein it in or to make it hold firm for the bowshot. That’s why it is called Red Harrier.34 He also said that when this horse came to a river, it would ford the water just as if it were on level land. When it reached the middle of the river, it didn’t eat grass or straw but swallowed fish and turtles. This horse can go a thousand li in a single day and can carry over eight hundred pounds. This is no ordinary horse!” When he finished speaking, Lü Bu said, “I did not
 
Dong Zhuo and Lü Bu 31
kill my master because of the horse.” Bu went on, “Over a long period of time my master constantly shamed me. That’s why I killed Prime Minister Ding.”
Dong Zhuo saw that this Lü Bu was ten feet tall and had a waist of seven double handspans. Alone he had slain over a hundred people: such a hero was rare in the world! [14a] “Right now is the time that such people as you are needed. What if I pardon your crime?” “Grand Preceptor,” replied Lü Bu, “I will be happy to present you your whip and hold up your stirrups.35 Allow me to honor you as my father.” A very pleased Grand Preceptor thereupon released Lü Bu.
That day the Grand Preceptor took command of his troops of five hundred thousand and a thousand battle-tested officers. To his left rode his adoptive son Lü Bu, astride Red Harrier, dressed in golden armor and wearing a xiezhi cap.36 He used a twelve-foot-long square-heaven dagger axe;37 from its top dangled a yellow pennant and leopard tail. He could run faster on foot than any cavalry mount. He served as General of the Left. To Dong Zhuo’s right rode Li Su, a descendant of Li Guang38 of the Han. This man wore a silver helmet and an armor of silver chainmail over a white battle dress. He used a fifteen-foot spear with a sickle-shaped Wu hook with a gathering of strings hanging from the base of its blade. He also carried a bow and arrow. For those who excelled in the civil arts, he had the grandee Li Ru, and for those who excelled in the martial arts, he had Lü Bu and Li Su—these three people supported Dong Zhuo.
When Dong Zhuo had led his army to Xiliang Prefecture, he conquered it at the first roll of the drum. He accepted the surrender of Zhang and Li and those two other miscreants together with their three hundred thousand troops. He then proceeded to the Eastern Capital Luoyang, and some twenty li to the northwest of Luoyang he had corvée laborers construct a walled city, which he called Meiyang.39 He ordered Zhang and Li to station their troops there and
horizontal nail through it. Its name comes from that of a mythical beast, the xiezhi, that could root out evil with its single horn.
which is the name given to a site west of Chang’an in Dong Zhuo’s biography in the Documents of the Later Han (see Fan Ye 1965, 2320). On his return from Xiliang, Dong Zhuo made a walled encampment here to “guard the imperial mausoleum.” While this may be true, it is more likely that it is a loan for the homophone 郿, a walled and fortified site that Dong Zhuo created for himself and his family just east of Chang’an, known as Meiwu 郿塢. See Fan Ye (1965, 2029). None of these historical sites are near Luoyang.
 
to request government provisioning. Dong Zhuo was going to stage an armed rebellion and he was constantly plotting for the empire of Han.
Dong Zhuo asked Li Ru, “Who can hold Xiliang Prefecture now that those four major bandits have left Xiliang?” “Grand Master,” replied Li Ru, “your sonin-law Niu Xin is suitable.” The Grand Master summoned Niu Xin to lead one hundred thousand troops to Xiliang and garrison the place.
Let us return now to Emperor Xian, who secretly summoned the Imperial Father-in-law Dong Cheng to the inner apartments. When the latter arrived there, the emperor stated his sagely command, “At present Dong Zhuo usurps my power. What can be done about it?” Dong Cheng replied, “My king, summon the liege lords of the empire and let them take you to Chang’an to establish your capital there. Then order the liege lords of the empire to combine their forces to kill Dong Zhuo. In that way peace will return to the empire.” The emperor asked, “Who is suitable to undertake this mission?” “I have under my command a colonel in charge of storerooms.40 He is right for the mission for he has the right bold mettle. If he carries off this important affair then he can be made grand marshal. Summon the Prince of Ji, Yuan Shao, and the Prince of Zhenhuai, Yuan Shu, and as army supervisor employ the Prince of Changsha, Prefect Sun Jian.” [14b]
A man came before the steps and, after he had loudly shouted out “ Ten thousand years,” the emperor asked him, “Your name, sir?” “I am Cao Cao, also known as Mengde.” When Emperor Xian observed this man closely, he was a match for twenty Dong Zhuos. At this moment the empire of the Han was at a loss what to do, so it had to employ this man! Emperor Xian gifted Cao Cao with rewards and sent him off, but with fear in his eyes, “If you succeed in this great mission, I will promote you to grand marshal of the empire. Be very circumspect in what you do. If you achieve success, I will promote you to Prime Minister of the Left.”
After Cao Cao had taken his leave from the emperor and left the city to unite all of the liege lords, he then proceeded to Dingzhou to meet with its prefect Gongsun Zan. As he was traveling, he noticed that the li markers were properly arranged and that bridges and roads were in good repair; the communities were populous and cattle and horses in good supply; no fields were left fallow and the harvests were plentiful. Cao Cao called a farmer over and asked him, “What is this place?” The farmer answered, “Let me inform you, your honor: this is Pingyuan District in Dezhou.” A surprised Cao Cao asked the farmer, “Who is the district magistrate here?” The farmer replied, “The district magistrate pays
 
Dong Zhuo and Lü Bu 33
no attention to anything, only the assistant magistrate does.” When he asked who the assistant magistrate might be, the farmer answered, “It’s that Liu Bei who defeated the Yellow Scarves a while back.” Cao Cao was greatly surprised and said, “If I can unite the liege lords, this place will provide the executioner who will behead Dong Zhuo!”
With thirty riders, Cao Cao waited outside the gates of the district yamen, and had his servants report to Liu Xuande that he was there. The gate guard told Liu Bei, “There is an imperial envoy of the Han outside of the yamen gate. You, sir, should hurry out to receive him.” The various officers greeted Cao Cao, led him into the yamen, and had him sit at the head of the hall. When the ritual greetings were finished, each took their place at the feast mat. After they had gone through several courses, each accompanied by wine, Cao said, “I bear the Sage’s directive to summon the liege lords of the twenty-eight garrisons. Now Dong Zhuo wields the power of the throne and has long plotted to seize the world of Han. I am to direct all the liege lords to protect His Majesty, pacify the empire, and smash Dong Zhuo. But there are Lü Bu and Li Su, each of whom has unmatched courage—no one can match them. Because I was on my way to inform Han Fu in the Henghai Command in Cangzhou, I passed by Pingyuan District, and heard that Xuande was here. So I came particularly to pay you my respects. Please don’t throw up any barriers to this, Lord Xuande. For the sake of the world of Han, if you go to Tigerkeep Pass and smash Dong Zhuo and Lü Bu, [15a] I will recommend you, sir, to be invested as a myriarch liege lord and be placed into the ministerial offices.”
Cao Cao took up his cup and toasted Liu Bei, who said, “I, this humble officer, have no skill in the martial arts and am unfamiliar with bow and horse; I fear I will ruin this affair of state.” At his side Zhang Fei spoke up, “Brother! From the time we bound ourselves in righteousness at the Peach Orchard, together we have smashed the Yellow Scarves and made a name for ourselves in history. Now, for the state, this is precisely the juncture to utilize men. Let us follow all of the liege lords to Tigerkeep Pass and do battle with Dong Zhuo and Lü Bu. Relying on the emperor’s great beneficence, after we kill Dong Zhuo and Lü Bu we will have our names inscribed in the Lingyan Gallery.41 And that is so much better than being just a magistrate in Pingyuan District. We will be able to wear golden belts and robes of purple, to offer protected privilege to our sons, and to have our wives invested with noble title. If you don’t want to go, brother, I do.” Cao Cao thanked him as soon as he heard this utterance. When the feast was done, Cao Cao reminded them twice and then once again,
 
“General Zhang has promised to go. But if he arrives late, I will send an envoy to request the three of you.” Cao Cao withdrew and started down the road.
Xuande returned to his lodgings where he discussed it all thoroughly with his brothers. He explained, “If we go and we wind up unused after we get there, where can we return?” “Relax, brother,” said Zhang Fei, “I’ll go alone to smash Dong Zhuo and execute Lü Bu.” Xuande said, “Wait until the envoy comes before you leave.”
The Battles at Tigerkeep Pass
Let us go back now to speak about Emperor Xian in Luoyang, who was weak and incompetent as a ruler. The Grand Preceptor Dong Zhuo wielded all power. Dong weighed three hundred pounds and was set on usurping the state. He carried his sword when he entered the palace42 and everyone—civil and military—was terrified of him. He constantly bullied and suppressed the liege lords of the empire, and he relied on these subordinates: his adopted son Lü Bu, the civilian Li Su, the four bandits, and the eight strong generals.
Let us now speak instead of the prefect of Qiao Commandery, Cao Cao, who had gone to court a second time to have an audience with the emperor. Seeing how Dong Zhuo used his power to bully others, he found the situation even more unbearable. When court was finished, he again sent up a memorial to the emperor to discuss how he might, in a hidden way, put a secret edict into effect to assemble all of the liege lords in the empire in front of Tigerkeep Pass, there to join together to smash Dong Zhuo. The emperor decreed that on the third day of the third month of the fifth year of Zhongping43 the multitude would assemble before Tigerkeep Pass. Immediately he ordered him to summon all liege lords across the empire and to arrive as soon as possible before the pass.
The soldiers of Changsha were the earliest and the prefect of Changsha, Sun Jian, was the first to reach the pass. Yuan Tan of Qingzhou did not go. When all the armies and horses of the empire were in front of the pass, they lacked [15b] fodder and provisions. In order to press for grain, Cao Cao went to pressure Yuan Tan to go. In a few days, Cao had gone as far as Pingyuan District where he, when he finished greeting Xuande, said, “All of the liege lords are at Tigerkeep Pass, what about you three generals?” Xuande said nothing, but Zhang Fei spoke, “I see that the world of Han is now without a proper ruler, and that we should slay that traitorous official, the Grand Preceptor, to reestablish the
 
The Battles at Tigerkeep Pass 35
house of Han.” The First Ruler Liu Bei44 finally relented. Cao said, “The Prince of Ji, Yuan Shao, is now the generalissimo, and you can take a letter to him.” The prime minister then wrote a letter and turned it over to the First Ruler. After Lord Cao departed, he went straight to Qingzhou.
But let us now speak of Guan, Zhang, and Liu, who mobilized three thousand brave cavalry from their subordinates and selected a day on which to begin their journey to the southwest. They had been on the road for several days when they set up their tents about five or six li from the main camp at Tigerkeep Pass. On the next day the three put their battle raiment in order and went first to see the generalissimo, arriving at the gate of the camp.
Let us return now to Yuan Shao, Prince of Ji, who had assembled the liege lords in his tent, and asked them, “The house of Han is now without a ruler and a traitorous official is wielding power. Emperor Xian is in Luoyang but is incompetent and weak. Dong Zhuo is at Tigerkeep Pass, where he has a hundred noted generals. The best of those is the unmatchable Marquis of Wen, Lü Bu, who is nine feet, two inches tall and employs a ‘square-heaven halberd.’ You many liege lords: how can you set a plan to execute the traitorous minister to repay the court and leave a name for those who follow?” The whole group of officers was silent.
Suddenly they heard the sound of a commotion outside the camp gates. The gate guard reported, “There are three generals outside the camp gate to see you.” The Prince of Ji quickly ordered them to be brought before him. The host of officers all looked at the general who was the leader. His face was like a full moon, his earlobes hung past his shoulders, his arms drooped below his kneecaps, and he had an aquiline nose and dragon face. He truly had the features of an emperor and king. The general below and to his left was nine feet, two inches tall, a man of Xieliang in Puzhou, called Guan Yu, also known as Yunchang. Below and on his left was a man of Zhuojun in Youzhou, Zhang Fei, also known as Yide, who had a leopard head and round eyes, the neck of a sparrow, and the whiskers of a tiger. The Prince of Ji asked, “Who are you three generals?” The First Ruler replied, “This useless one is a man of Dasang Village in Zhuo Commandery, in Youzhou. I am Liu Bei, currently District Magistrate in Pingyuan.” “Are you the ‘green robed one with [16a] sophora screed?’ ”45
 
“Yes,” replied the First Ruler. “Because the prefect of Qiao Commandery passed by and left a letter for me, I’ve now come to the pass to smash Dong Zhuo together with you.” The Prince of Ji was elated.
The First Ruler took out the letter and turned it over to Yuan Shao. After Yuan Shao finished reading it, he asked the host of liege lords, “What about this?” In a thundering voice one of the generals in the tent shouted out, “The liege lords have assembled here at Tigerkeep Pass and will cut off the heads of that traitorous minister Dong Zhuo and Lü Bu within days.” The officers looked and it turned out to be the Grand Protector of Changsha, Sun Jian. Song Wenju said, “We don’t need any‘green-robed esquire’ to help us kill Dong Zhuo at the pass.” When the host of officers heard this, they were all happy. The Prince of Ji asked again, but none of the officers spoke.
The three generals bade goodbye to the Prince of Ji and went out of the camp to their own bivouac about five or six li to the northeast. “If we had been in Pingyuan,” said Zhang Fei, “we would never have suffered such shame because of another.” They had an audience with Yuan Shao at dawn on the following day, but the host of officers expressed their displeasure again. The three generals went back out again, and the next day they hit the road directly back to Pingyuan. They had gone but a few li when they encountered Cao Cao, and they told him truthfully everything that happened. Cao Cao laughed and said, “Follow me back again. If you smash this traitorous official and establish great merit, no office is out of your reach.” The next day they returned with their army and reached the grand camp of Yuan Shao.
Two days later, Cao Cao spoke in the camp, “Xiao He recommended Han Xin three times, and this gave rise to the Han, which has lasted for four hundred years.” The Prince of Ji was setting out a grand feast and invited Prime Minister Cao and the liege lords. Just as the main banquet was progressing, someone reported that the Marquis of Wen, Lü Bu, was challenging them to battle at Tigerkeep Pass. The Prince of Ji asked, “Who dares battle to death with Lü Bu?” He hadn’t finished speaking when everyone saw a general come forth, and they recognized him as the Infantry General Cao Bao, who was in the employ of Tao Qian, the prefect of Xuzhou. He spoke of his own volition, “I will battle to death with Lü Bu, and I want to capture him.” The assembled officers were all delighted. He got on his horse and arrayed his troops against Lü Bu, but he was quickly taken by Lü. In less than two hours his defeated troops had returned, explaining that the Marquis of Wen had seized Cao Bao after a single round. The Prince of Ji was alarmed. Someone then said, “But they have released Cao Bao to return!” When Cao Bao entered the camp, the host of officers all said, “Lü Bu is undefeatable and wants only to capture us, we liege lords of the eighteen garrisons.” Every one of the officers was filled with fear.
At dawn of the next day, a spy reported, “Lü Bu has left Tigerkeep Pass with an army of thirty thousand [16b] and challenges us to battle.” The Prince of

The Battles at Tigerkeep Pass 37
Ji asked the host of officers, “Who will do battle with the Marquis of Wen?” Before he had finished speaking, Sun Jian, prefect of Changsha, had led out his army and horse to face off with Lü Bu. He and Lü Bu had only fought for three rounds before Sun Jian was mightily defeated. Lü Bu chased him into a great forest and launched an arrow that struck Sun Jian. Sun Jian then employed “the golden cicada husks off its shell” stratagem—that is, he hung his armor and clothes on a tree and fled. Lü Bu sent the strong general Yang Feng off to Tigerkeep Pass with Sun Jian’s helmet and battle garb to turn over to Dong Zhuo. But on his way, he ran smack into Zhang Fei, who wrestled the helmet and battle garb away from him.
At day’s light, Zhang Fei reached Yuan Shao’s great camp and got off his horse. He went to see the First Ruler and Lord Guan. Xuande explained, “Sun Jian said that we were nothing but cats and dogs, just sacks to stuff with food and bone racks on which to hang clothes.” The First Ruler said, “He is the prefect of Changsha, and I am just a green-robed esquire. How can I even hope to get the best of him?” Zhang Fei laughed and shouted, “A real man doesn’t worry about life or death, but plans a name for later generations!” Neither the First Ruler nor Lord Guan could stop him, and Zhang Fei took off straight for the Prince of Ji’s tent, where he presented the helmet and battle garb to the prince. The Grand Protector Sun Jian and the other officers were silent. In a voice like a huge bell, Zhang Fei said, “Earlier the prefect called us the likes of cats and dogs. But when Lü Bu came out of the pass, the prefect got to escape by husking off his battle garb.” Sun Jian was outraged when he heard this, and pushed Zhang Fei out with the intent of cutting off his head. All of the liege lords stood up, but Yuan Shao, Prince of Ji, Liu Biao, Prince of Jing, and Cao Cao of Qiao Commandery said, “Lü Bu’s might cannot be matched. If we decapitate Zhang Fei, who will smash Dong Zhuo?” Sun Jian was silent, and Zhang Fei offered, “When Lü Bu comes out of the pass, we three brothers will cut the head off that slave.” The host of officers was delighted and Zhang Fei managed to get out of it.
On the third day, Lü Bu came out to battle again, and all the liege lords went out of the encampment to face off with Lü Bu. Zhang Fei rode out holding his spear
The Three Battle Lü Bu
and battled with Lü for more than twenty rounds, but there was no clear winner. Lord Guan flew into a rage, let his horse run free, and twirling his blade battled twice with Lü Bu. The First Ruler couldn’t stand it anymore and employed his double blades, riding three times against Lü Bu, who was greatly defeated and fled, returning back up Tigerkeep Pass to the northwest.
 
The next day Lü Bu came down out of the pass and shouted, “Send out the big-eyed fellow!” [17a] Zhang Fei, greatly enraged, came out on his horse, holding his divine eighteen-foot spear, and with round eyes glaring went straight away to seize Lü Bu. The two horses met for more than thirty rounds, but there was no clear winner.
Zhang Fei Battles Lü Bu Alone
Zhang Fei had always loved battle and he smashed into his opponent and battled him for thirty more rounds, and in that fight one of Lü Bu’s battle flags wrapped around his face. Zhang Fei was like a god and Lü Bu quailed in his heart, and spurred his horse back up into the pass, closed it tightly, and did not come out again. Lü Bu had the four miscreants tightly guard the pass. These four miscreants were Li Jue, Guo Si, Zhang Ji, and Chu Chou.
Diaochan
Let us go back now to speak of Grand Preceptor Dong, who had intercepted the royal chariot in Luoyang and taken the emperor west into Chang’an. The emperor took a seat in the Palace of Eternal Peace and ordered the Grand Preceptor to lay a banquet. When it got late, the emperor, feeling the effects of the liquor, returned to his rear chambers. Dong Zhuo spied Consort Four,46 and began to flirt with her in suggestive language. There was a prime minister there, Wang Yun, who in pique said to himself, “There is no ruler in the empire!”
Wang Yun went back to his residence and dismounted, and sat glumly in a small courtyard. He told himself that Emperor Xian was weak and powerless; now that Dong Zhuo had grasped power, the empire was in deep peril. Suddenly he saw a woman burning incense, remarking that she would not be able to return home and see her master again. She burned incense and made two bows. Wang Yun said to himself, “I am troubled by state affairs, but what’s this woman praying for?” He had no other recourse but to go and ask her, “Why are you burning incense? Tell me the truth.” He scared Diaochan so much that she fell quickly to her knees, daring not to hide anything. She truthfully revealed her feelings, “This humble concubine was originally surnamed Ren, and my child name was Diaochan. My master was Lü Bu, but we were separated at Lintao and haven’t seen each other since. This is why I’m burning incense.” The prime minister was overjoyed, “This woman is the one who will bring peace to

Diaochan 39
the Han empire.” He returned to a hall and summoned Diaochan, “I will look upon you and treat you as my own child.” He then gave her gold, pearls, and bolts of silk and sent her on her way.
Several days later, the prime minister invited Grand Preceptor Dong Zhuo to a banquet. As the day drew late, the Grand Preceptor was feeling the effects of the wine and the candles and lamps appeared to be flickering and shimmering. Wang Yun gathered dozens of beautiful women in a cluster, and placed Diaochan in the middle with the others around her. In her chignon were stuck short golden pins with green-tinted white jade; on her body she wore a chemise of crimson silk woven with golden threads. She was a veritable state-toppling, city-toppling beauty! Dong Zhuo [17b] was greatly taken aback, and his gaze moved over her awhile before he said to himself, “My rear chambers simply lack a woman like this!” Wang Yun had her sing, and the Grand Preceptor was delighted. Wang Yun said, “She’s a person from Lintao, west of the pass;47 her surname is Ren, and her child name is Diaochan.” The Grand Preceptor became infatuated with her, and the prime minister assented to the match. When the feast ended, the Grand Preceptor also arose.
At dawn the next day, the prime minister thought to himself, “I have eaten my lord’s salary as a minister, but now I have come up with a plan to make the house of Han secure once again. If I am not successful, I will at least earn a reputation through my death.” Immediately he invited Lü Bu to a meeting and fêted him until late in the day, when the minister once again had Diaochan come out and sing at the banquet. Lü Bu looked at her and thought to himself, “Ding Jianyang rebelled at Lintao in those days past, and I didn’t know where my wife Diaochan ended up. But here she is today!” Wang Yun took up a cup and spoke, “Marquis of Wen, your face has taken on a look of anxiety, but why?” Lü Bu rose from his seat and told everything in precise detail. The prime minister was overjoyed, “Now there is a ruler in the empire of Han!” The prime minister spoke again, “I didn’t know she was your wife. There’s nothing happier in the world than the reunion of husband and wife.” And then he went on, “I have treated her as if she were my own daughter. Let’s select an auspicious date and propitious hour, and I will send Diaochan to the residence of the Grand Preceptor, where she can become your wife again.” Lü Bu was extremely happy, and as it drew late, he announced he was going home.
Within a few days Wang Yun dispatched Diaochan, accompanied by a young serving girl, in a four-in-hand, bearing rich gifts to the Grand Preceptor’s residence. That day, the third day of the third month of the seventh year of the Zhongping reign,48 the Grand Preceptor was sitting silently when someone
 
reported, “Prime Minister Wang Yun has sent someone here in his four-inhand and with rich gifts.” The Grand Preceptor scurried out and welcomed him in the reception hall, remarking, “Is it Diaochan?” “Yes, it is,” said Yun. The Grand Preceptor had wine put out. Wang Yun spoke, “I am feeling a little ill, so I won’t tarry here.” He bade the Grand Preceptor goodbye and left.
Late that night, Dong Zhuo and Diaochan drank together. Now Dong Zhuo was a lecher and a drunk. About two days later, when Lü Bu returned from the Serpentine,49 he dismounted at the front of the residence, and his eight strong generals all scattered. Late that night the Marquis of Wen heard the sound of music tinkling and ringing in the residence, and he asked his attendants why it was happening. All of them explained, “He’s got a woman from the prime minister; it’s that Diaochan!” Lü Bu was greatly shaken and walked to a place underneath the gallery corridor, [18a] but there was no way he could see inside. Suddenly he saw Diaochan push aside the curtain and come out. Lü Bu was incensed and asked, “Where is that miscreant?” “He’s already drunk,” replied Diaochan. Lü Bu raised his sword and went into the hall, where he saw Dong Zhuo snoring like thunder, lying there like a mountain of flesh, and cursed him, “You, miscreant, you have no morals!” A single swipe of the sword cut his neck, and the fresh blood spurted out. He stabbed Dong Zhuo, who then died.
Lü Bu went quickly out of the house and fled to the prime minister’s residence. Wang Yun quickly asked him what was happening. Lü Bu told him the whole story from the start. The prime minister, overjoyed, said, “You will be the most famous man of this age! If you had not slain Dong Zhuo, the Han empire would be in as much danger as a stack of piled-up eggs!” As they were speaking, a gate guard reported, “Li Su is outside, sword raised, looking for Lü Bu.” The prime minister went outside with the speed of fire and saw Li Su approach, who said, “Lü Bu has killed the Grand Preceptor. If I see Lü Bu, a thousandsliceswillcuthisbodytoshreds.”WangYunsaid,“Youaremistaken, general. The house of Han has lasted for four hundred years. Your ancestor Li Guang supported the house of Han. Dong Zhuo has recently monopolized all the power and Lü Bu has extirpated him. You say you ‘will slay Lü Bu,’ but if you do your name will be cursed throughout the world—unlike your ancestors. One who can dismiss the dark to let the light shine is truly a great man.” Li Su threw his sword on the ground, clasped his hands, and bowed, saying, “You are right, Prime Minister. I request to speak with the Marquis of Wen.” When the two met, Lü Bu told him all about Dong Zhuo’s immorality. Li Su said in a rage, “I never knew the truth of the matter!”
 
Lü Bu and Liu Bei 41
Lü Bu had taken his leave of Wang Yun and returned to his house when the gate guard reported, “Defender-in-Chief Wu Zilan has surrounded the residence with ten thousand soldiers.” Lü Bu thought to himself, “I cannot stay in Chang’an any longer.” He summoned the eight strong generals, and with three thousand men, he took the eastern gate and then departed. Defender-in-Chief Wu Zilan was catching up behind him and another ten thousand men blocked the way ahead. But when the dead Dong Zhuo’s four grand marshals—Li Jue, Guo Si, Fan Chou, and Zhang Ji—cursed him as a “slave,” the Marquis of Wen gave no response and smashed through their formation.
Lü Bu and Liu Bei
Ahead, he reached Tong Pass, where the prefect of Qiaojun, Cao Cao, blocked his way and this set the two armies against each other. Lü Bu took the pass and went out. After he had gone eastward for many li, he came across the prefect of Suiyang [18b] Guo Qian, who said, “Marquis of Wen, don’t enter my city, I will give you gold and pearls.” Lü Bu went on in a northeastern direction. After a few days he came to a place that was very rich in mulberry and hemp. When he asked which place this was, people told him, “This is the area of Xuzhou.” And when he asked who the prefect of Xuzhou might be, they told him, “That was the old general Tao Qian. But on his deathbed he thrice ceded Xuzhou to Xuande.” Lü Bu thought to himself, “In front of Tigerkeep Pass we became enemies for life.” But he also thought, “I have not even a square inch of land to call my own.” At his side Cheng Gong said, “Guan, Zhang, and Liu Bei are all tigerlike generals.” When the marquis of Wen kept silent, Chen Gong continued, “Liu Bei is a man of humanity and virtue. You should write him a letter.”
Lü Bu immediately wrote a letter for Chen to take into Xuzhou to show Xuande. Xuande invited Chen Gong to sit down. Chen Gong presented the letter to Xuande, and he read its contents.
Filled with shame, your younger brother Lü Bu kowtows and addresses the general’s banner of Lord Xuande, warden of Xuzhou.
At present the weather of the first month of summer is clear and pleasant, now that the plum rains have just cleared away. Humbly I consider that Your Honor is advancing in rank with each action and from his tiger tent conducts his administration with ease, and I therefore have the temerity to implore your divine intelligence to rescue and protect me.
The battles at Tigerkeep Pass were not my crimes, but all the fault of Dong Zhuo. But I am only too well aware of my own crimes and am filled with worry on that account. I should have visited your abode earlier to pay

42
my respects and offer my apologies for transgressions of former days. Since I have left Chang’an, my men are worn out and my horses lack fodder, so we cannot proceed any further. If you would be so kind as to forgive me, I would be unable to contain my joy. Take good care of yourself until the day we may meet.
In haste.
Lü Bu Submits to Xuande
When Xuande had read the letter, he was very pleased, and after he had treated Chen Gong to wine and a meal, the latter took his leave and left. One general stepped forward and said to Xuande (this general was Jian Xianhe), “My lord, haven’t you heard about Prefect Ding Jianyang from Lintao? Lü Bu addressed him as father but killed him because of that Red Harrier. Just recently in Chang’an he killed Dong Zhuo because of Diaochan. What to do if this Lü Bu, while the two generals Zhang and Guan are not in this city, would betray us and rob us of Xuzhou?” The First Ruler said, “Lü Bu may lack humanity, but he is now without fangs and claws, and he also begs us piteously in this letter, so he can rest for a while in this city.” Liu’s officials could not change his mind.
The next day at break of dawn, the First [19a] Ruler invited Lü Bu into the city to the music of drums, and banqueted him in the big hall for a few days. To the consternation of his officers, Xuande addressed Lü Bu as elder brother. A flustered Jian Xianhe immediately secretely dispatched a trusted follower to get Guan and Zhang and bring them back into the city.
The next day, at break of dawn, Xuande and his two younger brothers met with Lü Bu. A few days later, Lü Bu raised a question with his officers, saying, “From the time we crossed Tong Pass we have not found a single square inch of land to call our own.” Chen Gong said to the Marquis of Wen, “You must have heard that the world consists of nine regions and that Xuzhou is the top commandery. It is a place from which kings rise. Once you obtain Xuzhou, you can consider the rest of the empire as nothing.” Lü Bu replied with a smile, “Of course I want to take Xuzhou, but Xuande has treated me extremely well. On top of that, Guan and Zhang are generals who are as fierce as tigers and wolves. What would we do if we fail?”
A few days later, when Lü Bu and Xuande were sitting together, the First Ruler said, “Fengxian, you have no place to stay. It is only my humble opinion, but eighty li to the northwest is Xiaopei. What about stationing your troops there to build up your strength?” Lü Bu was very pleased and the next day he took his leave of the First Ruler and led the troops under his command to Xiaopei.
 
Lü Bu and Liu Bei 43
Half a year later, more or less, someone reported to the First Ruler, “Yuan Shu in Shouchun, four hundred li south, has sent out his Crown Prince Yuan Xiang at the head of an army that is on its way to take Xuzhou.” The First Ruler immediately appointed Zhang Fei as a reception envoy to welcome Yuan Xiang in the south. Some thirty li of travel brought Zhang to a pavilion called Stone Pavilion Posthouse, where he received Yuan Xiang. When the two had exchanged ritual greetings, Zhang Fei set out three rounds of wine, and when this was finished, Yuan Xiang discussed the matter of Xuzhou. Zhang Fei did not accede to his demands, so Yuan Xiang rudely swore, “Xuande is a hick who weaves mats and plaits sandals!” Enraged, Zhang Fei cursed, “My brother is the son of a whole line of emperors and kings, the seventeenth-generation grandson of Emperor Jing of the Han, and a descendant of the Quiet Prince of Zhongshan. When you curse him as ‘a hick who weaves mats and plaits sandals!’ you insult my brother. Truly, it’s your ancestors who are nothing but farm boys.” Zhang Fei was about to leave abruptly when Yuan Xiang began to strike him.
Zhang Fei Hurls Yuan Xiang to the Ground
Zhang Fei grabbed him tight, lifted him up with his hands, and hurled him down to the ground at the Stone Pavilion. None of the officers exhorted him not to, so he killed Yuan Xiang by smashing him on the ground.
Those who accompanied Yuan Xiang went back and saw Yuan Shu. Yuan Shu wept, [19b] “That damned Zhang Fei!” He immediately ordered his major general Ji Ling to take Xuzhou with three hundred thousand troops. The First Ruler left Zhang Fei in charge of Xuzhou, while he and Lord Guan and the other officers went south to confront Ji Ling and they stayed away for a month.
But let’s now tell how Zhang Fei was drunk every day and never once sobered up. He did not attend to business. Cao Bao, one of two officials who served Zhang Fei, vilified the deceased Tao Qian, “Couldn’t you entrust Xuzhou to me? No, you had to cede it to Liu Bei! Liu Bei has gone south to confront Ji Ling; no one is sure how the battle will turn and Liu Bei has placed this nobody in charge of the prefecture! All the common people are filled with resentment.” Cao Bao tried to coax Zhang Fei through rhetorical persuasion, and when the latter did not heed him, he vilified Zhang Fei. Zhang Fei flew into a rage and said, “I have been the first in giving my all for the state. Since my brother has taken Xuzhou, it’s right that he puts me in charge in the interim.” Then he whipped Cao Bao. When Cao Bao went to his eastern residence, he came up with a plan that would pay back the injustice he had just suffered. He had his son-in-law Zhang Ben secretly write a letter and go to Xiaopei to see Lü Bu, who not only wined and dined him, but also gave him gold and pearls. After
 
Zhang Ben went back, Lü Bu asked his officers, “What shall we do now?” Chen Gong replied, “Xuande went south to confront Ji Ling, and Zhang Fei is totally drunk every day.”
Cao Bao Offers Up Xuzhou
The Marquis of Wen led his troops to Xuzhou where Cao Bao immediately offered up the west gate, and Lü Bu entered the city. Zhang Fei was drunk as a skunk when someone advised him, “Her Ladyship is coming.” This was Xuande’s wife. Her Ladyship said, “Uncle, your elder brother has gone south to defeat Ji Ling and the outcome of that battle is still unclear. But you are ‘under the weather’ every day. What will happen to us if Xuzhou is lost?” But Zhang Fei replied, “Who would even dare glance at Xuzhou?” Before he had finished speaking they suddenly heard war cries shaking the earth and someone explained to Zhang Fei, “Cao Bao has seduced Lü Bu into action and led him into the city.” Zhang Fei was flabbergasted and Her Ladyship looked up to heaven and wept. Zhang Fei mounted his horse and engaged Lü Bu in battle, and the confused struggle lasted until evening, when Zhang Fei took the gate and made his escape. Two hundred li down south he met up with the First Ruler and explained the incident in detail. Lord Guan was furious with Zhang Fei.
The next day the First Ruler marched his army back and at some twenty li from Xuzhou he made camp. Xuande also thought, “Lü Bu is bound to kill [20a] my wife and son, so let me write a letter to him in order to save my family.” He immediately wrote a letter and had Jian Xianhe take that missive into the city and deliver it to Lü Bu. When Lü Bu read it, it turned out to reveal that Liu Bei was willing to abandon Xuzhou and retire to Xiaopei. Very pleased, Lü Bu sent Her Ladyship Mi and the Crown Prince Aji50 out of the city to meet with Xuande. Xuande promptly started to lead his troops to Xiaopei to live in retirement.
But someone then reported, “Ji Ling had brought thirty thousand troops and demands Xuzhou.” Now Ji Ling was a famous general of Yuan Shu. The First Ruler immediately led his troops and made camp on the western side, while Ji Ling made camp on the southern side, since their plan was to starve Xuzhou into submission. Lü Bu then also led his troops out of the city and made camp on the eastern side. Lü Bu wrote a letter to Ji Ling and Liu Xuande, in which he set a day for a banquet, “To which I invite the two of you.”
  
Lü Bu and Liu Bei 45
Lü Bu was seated in the tent that he had set up on a high hill. When the banquet was over, he said, “The emperor of the Han is a coward and a weakling, and the empire is still in turmoil. Yuan Shu in Shouchun should stick to his eastern garrison. As for Xuzhou, when Tao Qian was still alive he originally ceded it to Lord Xuande. But recently Yuan Shu has demanded Xuzhou. Let me now solve both of your problems.” At a distance of one hundred and fifty paces he had his men plant a square-heaven dagger axe in the earth, and he said, “I will shoot one arrow to hit the hole in the coin on top of the dagger axe. If I hit it, you two end your campaign. If I don’t hit it, Ji Ling still will march his army back, and if he doesn’t do so, I will help Xuande attack Ji Ling. And if Xuande doesn’t send his armies back, I will assist Ji Ling in attacking Liu Bei.” The two generals agreed to the proposals, and Lü Bu released his arrow. A poem reads,
The merit of a single arrow achieved the establishment of great peace: Thirty thousand heroic soldiers threw down their lances and spears. In those days his daring and courage were without equal among men, And so we in later generations still praise his pure name.
Lü Bu’s single arrow hit the hole in the golden coin, so Ji Ling marched his army back. The First Ruler treated Lü Bu to a banquet. After three days he returned to Xiaopei, while Lü Bu returned to Xuzhou.
About a half-year later when Liu Bei one day was seated in his office the gatekeeper reported, “Some elders have reported to me that the countryside is swarming with bandits.” The First Ruler ordered the two generals Guan and Zhang to go and arrest these bandits. Zhang Fei led a mixed group of one thousand brave horsemen twenty li directly east of Xiaopei. When he arrived at the edge of a forest, [20b] he dismounted and sat down. His underlings brought wine and offered a cup to Zhang Fei, who said with a smile, “What I love is this good brew!” He finished it in one gulp and then fell asleep, leaning against a tree. When it came to the second watch, straight east the sound of bells could be heard. His aide alerted Zhang Fei, who mounted his horse and went due east. After a few li he came across a thousand soldiers, including their leader, who were escorting who knows how many boxes and bags, crates and baskets. Zhang Fei thought, “This must be those bandits.” With one single loud shout he scared those people away and stole their money and goods. But their leader Hou Cheng51 said, “The Marquis of Wen has sent me to Yanjing to buy horses.” Zhang Fei didn’t believe him and had his soldiers take the booty to Xiaopei and present it to the First Ruler. Hou Cheng told Liu Bei, “Those are the money and goods for buying horses and belong to the Marquis of Wen.”

When the First Ruler looked at them more carefully, he was frightened and cursed Zhang Fei—all those goods did belong to Lü Bu. The First Ruler and Lord Guan wanted to send Zhang Fei to Xuzhou and offer him up to Lü Bu, but then they thought of their oath in the Peach Garden.
A few days later Lü Bu led thirty thousand troops and his eight stalwart generals and made camp twenty li from Xiaopei. The next day he led his troops to the city walls and engaged in a conversation with Xuande, and said he only wanted Zhang Fei, but the First Ruler refused. Lord Guan said, “Zhang Fei, you whipped that inspector general in Anxi and we lost half our troops and had to live as bandits for three years. Just now Xuzhou was lost. That was all your fault. And now you have seized Lü Bu’s money and goods, and that is your fault too!” Enraged, Zhang Fei mounted his horse, saying, “Those who dare die follow me!” Thirty-eight horsemen lined up for battle.
Zhang Fei Thrice Leaves Xiaopei
After they had gone for some twenty li they arrived at a large forest where they dismounted. Yide said, “I lost Xuzhou and now Xiaopei is endangered; it is all my fault. If I don’t achieve merit, I will be too ashamed to face my brothers.” And Zhang Fei also explained, “Lü Bu committed a crime in Chang’an and then fled east through Sword Pass to Xuzhou. Recently it’s come to light that Cao Cao, under imperial orders, is encamped at Suishui in command of an army of a hundred thousand with a thousand famed officers, solely to track down and arrest Lü Bu. With my eighteen horsemen I will go to Suishui, see Lord Cao, and borrow troops to defeat Lü Bu.”
After a few days on the road they arrived in Suishui, where he paid court to Cao Cao and told him the whole story, asking for troops to save his brothers. [21a] But Cao Cao said, “I haven’t seen Xuande from the time he left Tigerkeep Pass, so I cannot know whether you speak the truth when you want to borrow troops.”
“Prime minister, you are right,” said Zhang Fei, “I will return to my brother and get a letter.” Too hurried to take proper leave of Cao Cao, he immediately mounted his horse and returned with his eighteen horsemen to Xiaopei. When Zhang Fei saw that Lü Bu had encircled the city as tightly as an iron bucket, he had to really make an effort before he could open up a bloody passage into the city. His two brothers asked him, “Where have you been these last few days?” And Yide explained, “I fought my way through the battle line and was able to reach Cao Cao in Suishui to ask for relief.” The First Ruler was greatly surprised and asked, “And didn’t you get any troops?” Zhang Fei replied, “The prime minister said that I wasn’t carrying any proof, so I’ve come back to get a letter.” The First Ruler immediately wrote a letter, which he entrusted to Zhang Fei.
 
Lü Bu and Liu Bei 47
The next day Zhang Fei once again left the city with his eighteen horsemen and fought Lü Bu. The latter thought, “That bandit general has been coming and going a number of times, so he must be seeking a relief force.” But the Marquis of Wen was unable to block his way and Zhang Fei and his eighteen men smashed through the battle lines. After a few days he reached Cao Cao’s major camp. When the prime minister heard this, his pleasure was boundless. Zhang Fei delivered the letter to Cao Cao, and the letter read,
Filled with shame, your friend Liu Bei kowtows and addresses the banner of the prime minister.
At present it is the middle month of autumn. Humbly I consider that YourExcellencywitheachactionhetakesrisesinrank.Butnotshyingaway from your power and authority I have the temerity to inform you of my distress.
Presently there is that bandit Lü Bu, who executed Dong Zhuo and then fled from Chang’an. Once he obtained Xuzhou through surprise attack, he is now besieging Xiaopei. Alas, my army is small and my officers are few, the moat is shallow and the walls are low. Our situation is as urgent as if we were hanging upside down, and as perilous as that of piled-up eggs. I have therefore ordered Zhang Fei to take a letter and visit you despite the distance. If you would show us the kindness of your great grace, and especially if you would end the siege for us, not only would I, Liu Bei, receive your favor but the common people would benefit from your grace as well. If we can capture Lü Bu alive, the emperor will see Great Peace. Humbly I beg you to consider this request.
In haste
When Cao Cao had finished reading this letter, he was overwhelmed by joy. And he also said, “Zhang Fei’s bravery caps the world. None of the officers under my command are his like!” He also explained, “Zhang Fei, you are nonofficially appointed General of Chariot and Horse! If I return to court after this campaign in the east against Lü Bu, I will have you formally appointed!” He ordered that Zhang Fei and his eighteen riders be given wine and meat. [21b] He ordered people to carry the wine out of the camp. From a tent to the southeast two officers appeared, and one of them called Zhang Fei to dismount so they could meet, and when these two met each other, they were very happy. Lord Cao said, “This is Xiahou Dun.” Xiaohou said, “I see that the prime minister intends to go north and save Xiaopei, so who will be vanguard?” So he immediately appointed Xiahou Dun vanguard.
Within a day or so the prime minister broke camp and set out with all his men and after a few days they reached Xiaopei. Lü Bu and his troops came out

to confront them and Xiahou Dun rode out to do battle with Lü Bu. After only a few rounds Lü Bu feigned defeat, and when Xiahou Dun hotly pursued him, Lü Bu released an arrow that struck Xiahou Dun right in his left eye. Xiahou Dun dropped from his horse and pulled out the arrow. Xiahou said, “This eye is the seed of my father and the blood of my mother: it cannot be discarded!” Holding his eye in his mouth he mounted up and continued the fight. Lü Bu said, “This is no ordinary man!” Lü Bu was utterly defeated. Seven li from camp on his return, Xiahou Dun saw Zhang Fei who had also employed his troops. The latter hastily joined Xiahou Dun and they returned to see Cao Cao. Cao Cao treated Xiahou Dun’s wound with ‘metal arrowhead medicine.’
Three days later Lü Bu once again issued a challenge to battle. Zhang Fei fought more than three hundred rounds with him but the outcome remained undecided. But when the First Ruler of Xiaopei, Lord Guan, and the other officers together with the thousand of mixed brave horsemen inflicted a huge defeat on Lü Bu, he fled in an easterly direction toward Xuzhou. Ten li from the city, he heard a great commotion in front of him. Someone told the Marquis of Wen that there were defeated troops ahead.
Among them was Diaochan, who came to see him awash with tears, and who told him that Cao Cao had ordered Xu Chu to occupy Xuzhou. Lü Bu thought to himself, “Xuzhou is already lost; there is also Cao Cao who will have an overwhelming force when he unites with Liu Bei, Lord Guan, and Zhang Fei.” So he fled eastwards toward Xiapi. When he had arrived in that city, he did not leave its walls for several days. Someone told Lü Bu, “They are coming again.” When he had asked about their numbers, Chen Gong spoke up and said, “Marquis, you should divide your troops in two companies. Eighty li to the northwest from here is Ram’s Head Mountain, a place that can be easily defended. While you stay here at Xiapi, I will go to Ram’s Head Mountain. In case Cao’s troops attack Xiapi, I can protect you, and in case Lord Cao attacks Ram’s Head Mountain, you can protect me.” Chen Gong added, “Master Sun Wu has said. . . .52 Even I cannot oppose the power of Zhang Fei!” Lü Bu replied, “Chen Gong, what you propose is right on the mark!”
Lü Bu met with Diaochan in the back room. When he explained it to her, [22a] she wept and said, “Fengxian, don’t you remember how we were separated when Ding Jianyang rebelled in Lintao and the troops of Ma Teng arrived on the scene? We were separated and for three years could not see each other. After you killed Dong Zhuo you had no place to turn and fled east of the Pass. But now Xuzhou is lost. If you divide your army into two companies, the two forces will be separated. If we are separated, when will I see your face again?” Diaochan added, “‘In life we share a room, in death we share a grave.’
 
Lü Bu and Liu Bei 49
I will never leave you ’til the day I die.” “You are right,” a happy Lü Bu replied. The Marquis of Wen enjoyed his happiness with Diaochan every day. When someone came to tell him, “Lord Cao’s army has arrived, and the city is in imminent danger,” he seemed not to care at all, and none of his officers could talk sense into him. A few days later someone knocked on his window in the fourth watch of the night, shouting, “Xiapi is on the verge of being lost!” When the Marquis of Wen put on his clothes and came out, he saw his stalwart general Chen Gong, who said, “Cao Cao has opened the dikes of the Yi and the Si Rivers, inundating the area all around Xiapi.” At daybreak all the officers followed Lü Bu as he climbed the wall, and Chen Gong also said, “Marquis, when I earlier suggested that you divide your army into two companies in order to protect Xiapi, you didn’t listen to me. Now Minister Cao has inundated the fields outside Xiapi, and there are no plans left to consider.” The Marquis of Wen did not say a word, but descended from the wall and went to his compound, and again enjoyed his happiness with Diaochan every day, leaving his officers fuming with rage.
About half a month later he suddenly saw several men pull aside the curtain and enter. Among them Lü Bu recognized Chen Gong, Hou Cheng, and Zhang Liao. Hou Cheng was the one who addressed him, saying, “Marquis, we have followed you all the way from Lintao, but now after several years we still have not a square inch of land to call our own. Now Cao Cao and Liu Bei are camped outside the city with their two huge armies, the waters of the Yi and the Si are seeping into Xiapi, and our provisions are almost gone. Any day now Xiapi will be forced to surrender and then we all will die, but you are just enjoying each day with Diaochan.” Lü Bu laughed and said, “Those outside are Cao Cao and Liu Bei, they know me well! If the city is flooded by the water of the Yi and the Si, I have a horse called Red Harrier and Diaochan and I will flee on the back of that horse. That horse can cross moats, so what should I fear as I float away with Diaochan?” One of those men loudly cursed him out, “Lü Bu, you are a lowly born cur! You may say you will get away with Diaochan afloat on the water, but what about our troops and officers who number thirty thousand and the thirty thousand families of the common people inside the city?” He had barely finished speaking when he cursed him again. Lü Bu saw that it was Hou Cheng and ordered him shoved outside and beheaded. The other officers pled on his behalf and were able to save his life but he received thirty strokes with the cudgel. Lü Bu went back to his room, and the officers dispersed.
Three days later the officers still couldn’t let go and a drunk Hou Cheng cursed Lü Bu. That night he went straight to the back courtyard,

and when he saw that the grooms were drunk as skunks, he stole the horse. When he arrived at the west gate he ran into the stalwart general Yang Feng who said, “Hou Cheng, you are stealing the horse.” After he was killed by Hou Cheng, the latter breached the west gate and crossed the flood floating on the horse. At the fourth watch Guan Yu was on his rounds and captured Hou Cheng, and he obtained the horse. At daybreak he visited Cao Cao and told him the whole story. Minister Cao was very pleased.
Let us now go back to speak about Lü Bu who was sitting across from Diaochan. When someone told him that Hou Cheng had stolen his horse, Lü Bu wasgreatlysurprised.Thepersonwenton,“HehaskilledYangFengandjoined Cao Cao. What shall we do now?” None of his officers said a word.
In just a few days Cao Cao gave orders to block the upstream part of the river with boards, and he opened a riverway downstream. He released all of the water, and had the moat filled with sand and stone, and bushes and trees. He erected catapults to bombard the city walls. Cao Cao brought his army forth and issued a challenge. Lü Bu came out of the city gate on a different horse to confront the enemy. Engaging in battle with Xiahou Dun he feigned defeat. But when Lü Bu took flight, Cao Cao led his troops in a massive attack as soldiers lying in ambush rose on all sides. Lü Bu fled west in a panic but ran smack into Lord Guan. Then Lü Bu had an idea to go east to Xiapi but he ran straight into Zhang Fei.
Zhang Fei Captures Lü Bu
Together the generals captured Lü Bu and made him prisoner. Cao Cao sent someone to shout out loudly to the eight generals and other officers, and they all came to surrender. Cao Cao marched his troops back. Upon entering his camp, he took his seat in his tent and questioned these officers. Then, he ordered that the shackled Lü Bu and Chen Gong be brought before him. He asked Chen Gong, “You first served me, later joined Gongsun Zan, and then secretly fled to cast your lot with Lü Bu. What to do now this enterprise has failed?” Chen Gong replied with a smile, “It’s not my fault. I first joined you, Prime Minister, but you harbored the intention to usurp the throne. I later saw that Gongsun Zan messed up [23a] completely, so I joined Lü Bu. But who could have known that this bandit would rebel? Now that I have been captured, only death will be appropriate.” Cao Cao said, “What if I would spare your life?” But Chen Gong said on his own initiative, “That won’t do. Prime Minister, if I first joined Gongsun Zan and then served Lü Bu and if I cast my lot with you a second
  
Lü Bu and Liu Bei 51
time, people of later times would consider me a man without principle, so I prefer to accept death.”
Cao Cao Beheads Chen Gong
The prime minister said, “It is fitting to behead Chen Gong, but we should free his dependents.” Chen Gong loudly shouted, “Prime Minister, you make a mistake! As long as you allow my son to live, you are bound to cause yourself trouble in the future. But please pardon my mother and my wife.” After Cao Cao had given the order for their beheading, he allowed his mother and wife to live.
Next he ordered that Lü Bu be led before him and said, “He who stares a tiger in the eye does not speak of ‘danger.’ ” When Lü Bu saw that Cao Cao and Xuande were both seated in the tent, he said, “Prime Minister, if you will spare my life, I will pay you back with my death. I hear that you are good at commanding infantry and I am good at commanding cavalry. Now if cavalry and infantry would work in tandem, conquering the empire will be as easy as turning over one’s hand.” Cao Cao didn’t say a word, but looked at Xuande, and the First Ruler said, “You must have heard about Ding Jianyang and Dong Zhuo.”
Beheading Lü Bu at the White Gate
So when Cao Cao said, “Have him beheaded!” Lü Bu vilified Xuande, “You big-earedbandit!Youreallywanttodomein!”CaoCaohadLüBubeheaded.
Alas, the day he ate the blade below the city wall
Was quite unlike that time he shot at the battle-axe in his camp.
After he had beheaded Lü Bu he consoled Xiapi. Of the generals who had surrendered, Cao Cao especially appreciated Zhang Liao as the equal of Liu Bei, Guan Yu, and Zhang Fei. Holding hands, the prime minister each day drank wine with Xuande, as he hoped to make use of the First Ruler’s support. What did it look like? There is a poem that offers a description. The poem reads,
Liu Bei’s two eyes could see the lobes of his ears:
Arms so long they fell below his knees—he was an extraordinary man. He was in origin a descendant of the Prince of Zhongshan— Would he be willing to be a minister under the ministers of Lord Cao?
   