
“Transmit Our edict,” said Guangwu, “Tomorrow is the Festival of Clear and Bright, the third of the third month,3 so put this up on a yellow plaque: ‘We will enjoy the pleasure of this garden with the common folk.’”
When the next day arrived, the Hundred Surnames all enjoyed the flowers inside the Imperial Park, and they occupied all of the kiosks and halls.
Suddenly a single student came on the scene. In a white robe, a horn-studded belt, a gauze cap, and black boots—his left hand swinging a pot of wine; his right carrying an earthen bowl; and his back bearing his zither, sword, and book basket—he came to enjoy the sights of the Imperial Park. But he got there late and all the kiosks and halls were so full there was no place to sit. Our young burgeoning talent went straight ahead for a hundred paces or so and saw a cypress that would block the wind. And there he put his wine pot and earthen bowl down on the lush and green carpet of grass and unslung his sword, zither, and book basket. He settled himself down and poured some wine into the earthen bowl. After one drink he was thirsty for more, and he drank three more bowlsful, one after the other. Before you could snap your fingers, he was already half sloshed.
As soon as one bowl of Bamboo Leaf 4 pierces through his heart, Two peach blossoms appear on his face.
Now what was the name of our burgeoning talent? His surname was Sima, and he was known as Zhongxiang. Because he became a bit dejected while sitting there, he played a tune on his zither, and when done, opened up his book box and [1b] took out a book. He opened it to read, and reached the part about how the doomed Qin had pushed roads across the Five Ranges in the south,5 built the Great Wall in the north, filled in the Great Sea in the east, and in the west had constructed the Epang Palace, and how it had buried the scholars and burned the books. When Zhongxiang saw this, he could not suppress his fury and violently cursed, “The First Emperor was a ruler without the Way. Had I, Zhongxiang, been the ruler, of course I would have ensured that the common people of the whole world were overjoyed!” He also said, “The First Emperor oppressed the common people until eight or nine out of every ten died, none were given a decent burial, and the stench offended Heaven and Earth! Since
 
Sima Zhongxiang’s Karmic Dream 3
the Lord of Heaven made the First Emperor a ruler, even he must have some blind spots. Now in the south the First Emperor feared that Xiang Yu had already turned against him at Langya and then, in Xuzhou, Liu the Third6 of Feng in Pei had ‘roused righteous men’ to revolt. Blades and weapons suddenly sprang up throughout the world—troops suffered the hardship of belting on armor, and people suffered the misery of dirt and ashes.”
As soon as he had said this more than fifty men, clad in brocade gowns and flowery caps, suddenly emerged from behind a trellis of wild-roses and marched over to him. At the head were two rows of eight men in purple vestments and golden belts, with ivory tablets and ravenblack boots. One official of some rank or another, with a purple and gold fish7 hanging from his belt, addressed him as follows, “At the behest of the Jade Emperor we request Your Majesty to accept these six major ritual gifts.” Zhongxiang saw that another person was holding a golden-phoenix plate, on which six objects had been placed.8 These were the Equal-to-Heaven Cap, the Coiling-Dragons Robe, the Without-Worries Shoes, a scepter of white jade, a belt made of jade, and the precious sword of authority. After he was persuaded to do so, Zhongxiang accepted all of these objects and immediately put them on; he then sat down, holding the whitejade scepter in his hands.
The eight men told him, “This is not a proper place for Your Majesty to sit.” They had barely finished speaking when, all of a sudden, among those fifty men in their flowery caps several lifted up and brought over a dragon-phoenix palanquin which they put down in front of him. “May Your Majesty ascend the chair!” Zhongxiang lifted the hem of his yellow gown, ascended the chair and sat in a dignified manner. The eight men divided themselves into two rows to head the cortege, while behind him the fifty with flowery hats surrounded him in a dense group. They walked all the way to a palace hall that was covered with glazed tiles, and someone said, “We invite our king to dismount.”
He ascended the hall and saw a Nine-Dragon Throne. Zhongxiang sat down there in a dignified manner to receive congratulatory hurrahs of “Long live our Majesty,” and when that was done, the eight men addressed him as follows, “Your Majesty knows the crimes of Wang Mang: he killed Emperor Ping with poisoned wine, executed the infant Ying, did in the empress, and cleaned out their palace apartments, killing who knows how many palace beauties.9 These
 
were his crimes. Later he established the house of Xin and became emperor. He took on the adult name Great Lord. [2a] But eighteen years later Liu Xiu from Whitewater Village in Dengzhou in Nanyang rose in righteous rebellion, smashed that Wang Mang, and snatched the empire back again. He deposed Wang Mang, who is now banished and locked away in a courtyard. Currently, His Majesty Guangwu occupies the throne. For his ministers he has in support the lords of the twenty-eight fixed constellations and the four Dipper stars to serve him as generals and commanders. Guangwu is the Great Thearch of Purple Tenuity.10 Now a sky cannot have two suns; a people cannot have two rulers. But you, our king, have here accepted this appointment. Yet you have neither troops nor generals. Not only do you lack wisdom and cunning, you don’t even have the strength to truss up a chicken. If Guangwu learns about this, leads his troop and officers and appoints a grand marshal, you think he’ll let you off?”
Zhongxiang asked, “My ministers, what would you have Us do?”
The eight men said, “Your Majesty should try out the Nine-Dragon Throne but if you look up at the plaque below the eaves, you’ll see this is definitely not the Major Audience Hall with its nine bays.”
When Zhongxiang looked up, he saw a red-lacquered plaque with four golden characters as big as dustpans:“Hall for Avenging Wrongs.” Zhongxiang dropped his head and pondered the meaning but couldn’t figure it out. So he asked, “My ministers, We do not understand what this means.”
The eight men replied, “Your Majesty, this is not the world of light, but that of the shades. A moment ago when you were reading about the doomed Qin in the Imperial Garden, you vilified the First Emperor and complained about the intentions of Heaven and Earth. Your Majesty, is it not said that those who follow the Buddha are reborn above into paradise, but those who do not are reborn below into hell? Just consider the people who lived in the times of Yao, Shun, Yu, and Tang: they deserved to be rewarded, just as the people of Jie and Zhou deserved to be slaughtered.11 Our king does not understand the meaning in all of this: a ruler without the Way has a people who have committed a karmic sin. This is precisely by design of the Lord of Heaven. By vilifying the First Emperor you displayed your resentment toward the Lord of Heaven.
 
Sima Zhongxiang’s Karmic Dream 5
The Lord of Heaven ordered us to summon Your Majesty and make you the Lord of the Underworld in the Palace for Avenging Wrongs. If you can pass sentence on these underworld cases without any partiality, he will make you the Son of Heaven in the world of light, but if you judge them wrongly, you will be banished to the backside of the Mountain of Darkness and never again see human form.”
Zhongxiang said, “Which cases do I have to judge?”
The eight replied, “Your Majesty, you only have to transmit your sagely order and there will be people who submit a statement and make an accusation.”
“Well, I’ll do as you say.” When he transmitted his sagely order, there was indeed a man who loudly shouted, “I’ve suffered a wrong!” In his hand he held a single-page writ of accusation.
When Zhongxiang [2b] had a better look he saw a man with a golden helmet on his head, wearing golden chain-mail armor, dark red battle dress, and shiny black boots.12 Blood flowed from his neck and stained his gown below. He kept on shouting, “Injustice” and “I’ve been wronged.” When Zhongxiang accepted his written statement and unrolled it on his desk to read it, it turned out to be a case from 205 years past. “How in the world do you think I can pass sentence on such a case?” And he swept the documents from his desk. But the person lodging the accusation said, “I am Han Xin. I suffered at the hands of Gaozu of the Former Han. I hail from Huaiyin and achieved the rank of King of the Three Qi. I accumulated ten great merits. I pretended to construct a trestle road as a diversion so I could secretly cross Chencang and chase Xiang Yu to Raven River, where he wound up slitting his own throat. But while I made this major contribution to the establishment of the Han, Gaozu never even thought about ‘carrying the axle, pushing the wheel, or speaking an oath.’13 He pretended to go off on a visit to Yunmeng and had Empress Dowager Lü trick me into going to Weiyang Palace where I was slain by a blunt sword. I died through injustice, so please act on my behalf!”
A startled Zhongxiang exclaimed, “What should I do?”
“Your Majesty,” replied the eight men, “if you cannot quickly decide a case like this, how can you ever become a Son of Heaven in the World of Light?”
Before their words ended, he heard yet someone else shouting, “I, too, have suffered an injustice.” He saw a person with unbound hair and a red headscarf, dressed in a green robe under willow-leaf armor, and wearing shiny black boots. In his hand was a writ of accusation, and every single word that came out of
 
his mouth was “injustice” or “wronged.” When Zhongxiang asked him for his name, he replied, “I am Peng Yue. I was appointed King of Great Liang and was one of the liege lords under the command of Gaozu of the Han who, together with Han Xin, established the Han. But when peace finally reigned throughout the world, there was no further need for me either. I was tricked into coming to the capital where I was minced into a meat paste and fed to the liege lords throughout the empire. That is the wrong I have suffered.”
Zhongxiang accepted his statement.
Then he saw yet another, also holding a statement in his hand who shouted that he too had suffered injustice. Zhongxiang saw that this man wore a lionhead helmet, a green battle dress under dragon scale armor, and green boots. When asked for his name, Bu replied, “I am a vassal of Gaozu of the Han, and my name is Ying Bu. I was appointed as King of Jiujiang. The three of us— Han Xin, Peng Yue, and I—established the empire of Han: twelve emperors who have reigned for more than two hundred years. Such was our great merit! But in a time of peace they had no use for me either and Gaozu cunningly betrayed the three of us, tricked us into entering the palace, and had us all killed. Such are the wrongs we have suffered. May Your Majesty act on behalf of the three of us.”
The emperor grew furious [3a] and asked the eight men, “Where is that Gaozu of the Han?”
“Your Majesty has only to summon him,” they replied.
“Do that now,” said the emperor.
They transmitted his sagely order and summoned Gaozu of the Han. In no
time at all the latter arrived in front of the steps and threw himself prostrate on the ground. Zhongxiang interrogated him as follows, “The accusations of these three people are all the same. Han Xin, Peng Yue, and Ying Bu established the empire of the Han, but you cunningly accused them of rebellion and had them killed. What kind of principle is that?”
Gaozu replied, “The Yunmeng Hills have thousands of sights, so I went there to amuse myself. Empress Lü was temporarily in charge of the country and I have no idea whether these people rebelled or not. Please summon the empress dowager and we’ll see what the truth is.”
When the empress dowager had been summoned, had made her bows below the steps, and had wished Zhongxiang a myriad years, he interrogated her as follows, “When you were temporarily in charge of the country, you cunningly accused these three men of rebellion and intentionally slew these meritorious officials. What should be your punishment?”
The empress dowager glared at Gaozu and said, “Your Majesty,14 when you had become lord in charge of the mountains of rivers and of the altars of earth

Sima Zhongxiang’s Karmic Dream 7
and grain,15 I said to Your Majesty, ‘At present peace reigns, so why are you so unhappy?’ And your sagely intent was thus expressed, ‘You don’t know what’s bothering me. The Hegemon-King had a roaring and booming voice but these three men pursued him until he slit his throat at Raven River. These three are like sleeping tigers—what shall We do once they awaken? Now We will leave for Yunmeng to amuse ourselves, leave you to temporarily act as emperor, and you can trick these three into coming to the palace where you can do away with them.’ Your Majesty, why don’t you confess to this now instead of blaming everything on your lowly handmaid?”
Zhongxiang asked Gaozu, “These three men did not rebel but were deliberately murdered. Why don’t you submit a confession?”
“Your Majesty,” said Empress Lü, “it’s not my word alone. There is still another witness.”
When Zhongxiang asked who that was, she said, “That would be Kuai Che, also known as Wentong. If Your Majesty summons him, you will get to the bottom of it.”
After Kuai Wentong was summoned, arrived at the hall, and finished his dutiful ritual obligations, Zhongxiang asked, “Did these three men rebel? You are the witness!”
Wentong replied, “There is a poem that describes this. The poem goes,
How pitiable, that lord of Huaiyin— Capable of sharing the anxieties of Gaozu:
The Three Qin were rolled up like a mat,
And Yan and Zhao vanquished in a snap.
At night he dammed up a river with sacks of sand;16 In daylight he decapitated the rebel vassal.17
But because Gaozu was neither firm nor resolute Empress Lü decapitated the liege lords all.
After each of their confessions had been taken, Zhongxiang wrote a memorial to inform the Lord of Heaven. The Lord of Heaven immediately dispatched a
  
to carry out the will of Heaven. That edict of the Jade Emperor read:
For Zhongxiang to note:
Gaozu of the Han betrayed his meritorious ministers, so We will have these three men share the empire of the Han: Let Han Xin take as his share the Central Plain and become Cao Cao; let Peng Yue become Liu Bei in Sichuan; let Ying Bu take as his share the area east of the River and, as King Wu of Changsha, become Sun Quan. Gaozu will be reborn in Xuchang and become Emperor Xian, and Empress Lü will become his wife, Empress Fu. Let Cao Cao occupy the Moment of Heaven, imprison Emperor Xian, and kill Empress Fu to take revenge. East of the River let Sun Quan occupy the Advantages of Earth—all those many mountains and rivers! Let Liu Bei in Sichuan occupy the Harmony of Men. Liu Bei will be able enlist the courage of Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, but he will need a man of cunning and strategy. Let Kuai Wentong be reborn in Jizhou (which is Langya Commandery) as Zhuge Liang, also known as Kongming. His name in the Dao will be Master Sleeping Dragon and he will build himself a hermitage and live on Sleeping Dragon Ridge in Dengzhou in Nanyang. This place will be where lord and vassals unite and together establish their state. They will proceed to Yizhou in Sichuan where they will establish their capital and reign as emperors for over fifty years. Let Zhongxiang be reborn in the world of light as Sima Zhongda. He will gather in all three kingdoms and rule alone over the subcelestial realm.
Thus ends the verdict of the Lord of Heaven.
The Origin of the Yellow Scarves19
Now we will speak about something else. Right now, in the year in which Emperor Ling of the Han has ascended the throne, bronze and iron both rang out. The emperor, startled, asked his high ministers, “Has such a thing ever happened in past?”
 
The Origin of the Yellow Scarves 9
The Prime Minister Huangfu Song stepped forward from the ranks and replied, “This has happened twice from the ancient times of Pangu to the present. Long ago in the Spring and Autumn period, when the Son of Heaven, who was King of Qi, ascended the throne, bronze and iron rang out for three days and nights. The King of Qi then asked his great ministers,‘What good or bad fortune is foretold by this ringing of bronze and iron?’ He asked three times but all of the high ministers were silent. The King of Qi was furious and summoned the grandee Ran Qing,‘You are a grandee, why is it you cannot explain this? I will set a term of three days for you; you must reveal the fortune it signals, good or bad.’ The King of Qi did in fact not receive his ministers in audience for three days.
“But, when Ran Qing returned home, he was deeply depressed and unhappy. A family tutor at his mansion noticed the sorrowful expression on his face and asked the grandee,‘Why are you so unhappy?’ The grandee answered,‘Teacher, I will tell you. All the bronze and iron in the world are ringing, and when my lord and king asked me whether this predicted good fortune or bad, I truly had no idea. Now the King of Qi has given me a time limit of three days, and if I do not come up with an answer I will be charged with a crime.’ [4a] The teacher replied, ‘This is easy!’ The great grandee exclaimed, ‘If you know the answer, you will be appointed to office and receive a substantial reward. What of the fortune, good or bad, of this affair?’ The teacher replied,‘It doesn’t predict any good fortune or bad. It only predicts that a mountain will collapse.’ ‘How do you know?’ The teacher explained, ‘Bronze and iron are the offspring of the mountains and mountains are the progenitors of bronze and iron.’
“The great grandee Ran got the meaning and immediately went to court to report to the King of Qi. The latter assembled his ministers, and grandee Ran stepped forward from the ranks and reported,‘The ringing of bronze and iron does not predict any fortune, good or bad.’ The King of Qi asked,‘What?’ He replied,‘It predicts that a mountain will collapse.’ The ruler asked,‘How do you know?’ And he reported, ‘Bronze and iron are the offspring of the mountains, and the mountains are the progenitors of bronze and iron. It is neither lucky nor unlucky.’ The King of Qi was highly pleased and promoted Ran Qing to higher office and rank, to be held by his sons and grandsons without interruption. Only a few days after Ran Qing had reported to the throne, one of the peaks of Flowery Mountain collapsed. So, Your Majesty, this affair does not predict good fortune and does not predict misfortune.”
It was no more than a few days after he had finished speaking that a memorial arrived from Yunzhou, stating that a hole had appeared at the foot of Mt. Tai, as big as a cartwheel and of unknown depth. The court dispatched an emissary to investigate whether this was a lucky or unlucky event.

Let us now talk about something else. At some distance from this hole there was a mountain house, the mountain retreat of Old Master Sun. The Old Master had two sons, the elder of whom took charge of the farm, and the younger of whom studied his letters. He was going to be schoolteacher Sun, but he suddenly contracted leprosy: all his hair fell out and his body never stopped oozing pus and blood. The stench offended his father and mother, and that’s why they built him a thatched hut more than a hundred paces behind the farm.
His wife brought him his food each day. Now one day, his wife brought him food early in the morning. It was the third month of spring and when she arrived at the door of his hermitage and saw the full extent of his illness, she could not bear to look at him. Covering her mouth and nose with her hands, she gave him his food but leaned away from him.
The schoolteacher heaved a sigh and said, “A wife is supposed to share your house when alive and your coffin when you’re dead. But—if even my wife can’t stand me when I’m alive, how much less can others? What’s the point of living even a day longer?”
After he had finished speaking and his wife had gone away, he came to the conclusion that he should find a place to die. He took the crutch he used in his illness, and put on his pusand blood-stained shoes. After going twenty or thirty steps straight north from his hut, [4b] he saw a hole. He put down the staff, took off his shoes, and straightaway jumped into it. But inside the hole it seemed like someone carried him on his back and laid him on the ground. He completely lost consciousness. After a long time, he suddenly came to and opened his eyes to have a look; straight above him he saw one dot of blue sky.
Theschoolteachersaid,“AmomentagoIwasdesperatetokillmyself,Inever expected I would escape death!”
After a time in utter darkness, he gradually saw a bright light straight north of him. About ten paces after he started walking in that direction, he saw a staff of white jade. But when he tried to take hold of it, it turned out only to be two leaves of a gate standing ajar. When he pushed that grotto gate open with his shoulder, it was as bright as day. He saw a stone mat and sat down on it to rest for a while. Tired, he lay down on the stone mat and fell asleep. But when he suddenly stretched himself out, his feet touched something soft. And when he arose with a start, what did he see? Doomed to an end was the four-hundredyear-old empire of Han, just because this schoolteacher reached this very spot!
The schoolteacher saw a huge python, a motionless coil—from fat head to tapered tail—three foot tall. Immediately that python escaped into the grotto. The schoolteacher followed the snake inside the cave, and although he didn’t see the snake, he did see a stone casket. He lifted the lid of the box with his hands and found one scroll of text. He took it out and read it from beginning to end. It turned out to be a text to cure all 404 diseases. It made no use of the eight

The Origin of the Yellow Scarves 11
kinds of eight herbs of the Divine Husbandman. It did not involve refining, matching, or curing with heat. Nothing was turned into pills or powders. No activants were used to get it down. On every page were prescriptions for cures; for every kind of symptom all you needed was a cup of water over which the correct incantation had been spoken—you would be cured as soon as you swallowed that! When he came to the passage on leprosy, the method prescribed was a famous prescription for treating the disease of our schoolteacher. When he saw this, he was filled with joy. He took the heavenly book with him, left through the grotto gate, and sat down on the stone mat.
Now our tale divides again. When the wife of the schoolteacher brought his food again, she couldn’t find the schoolteacher. She came back and informed her father-in-law and he immediately set out with the elder son and others to search. When they came to the hole, they saw his staff and his pusand bloodcovered shoes. The father and mother, elder brother, and wife circled around the pit, weeping. After some time they could hear someone calling from the pit. They fetched a rope and lowered it into the hole with a branch at its end to save the schoolteacher. When he appeared from the pit and father and son saw each other, they were deeply moved. [5a] When they were done crying, the schoolteacher said, “Father, don’t be sad and anxious anymore. I found a heavenly book that will cure my symptoms.” They immediately returned to the farm together. He took one cup of pure water and swallowed it into his stomach when he finished reciting the incantation. His leprosy was immediately cured, and his hair and skin went back to their original state! Later, no matter the distance, people came to seek treatment and every one was cured. They offered him as a contribution for his services cash and goods worth more than twenty thousand strings20 and he ordained roughly five hundred or more disciples.
One of these was called Zhang Jue. One day he took his leave from his teacher, “My old mother back at home is advanced in years, so I request a leave of absence in order to take care of her.”
The schoolteacher replied, “When you leave I will give you a book with famous prescriptions, so it doesn’t matter if you don’t come back.”
The teacher instructed Zhang Jue, “With these famous prescriptions you will cure all complaints and diseases in the empire; but never ask people for money. Abide by my words.”
After Zhang Jue had left his teacher and returned home, he treated diseases in all places he passed through; everyone was cured but he never asked for money. Zhang Jue said, “If I cure you, all of your young and adult males will follow me as my disciples—there is no claim on the old.”
 
Zhang Jue roamed through the four directions and ordained more than a hundred thousand disciples. He recorded their surnames and names and their places of registration, and also the cyclical year, month, and day of their birth. “If I want you for a mission, when that written notification arrives report with the speed of fire. And all of my disciples must abide by the meeting time. Anyone who does not come upon receiving the notification will certainly die. All those who do not follow me will be visited by disaster!”
So suddenly, on that day the Yellow Scarves rose in revolt against the Han, Zhang Jue’s notifications were dispatched throughout the whole world and within a few days his disciples had all arrived at Zhang Family Village, thirty li to the east of the capital of Guangning Commandery in Yangzhou Prefecture. Zhang Jue and two of his nephews gathered the whole in this village, and when they had all assembled, he shouted, “You two younger brothers bring them over here!”
The two younger brothers brought out four bundles, and when these were opened in front of Zhang Jue, they were filled with yellow scarves, which they distributed to the troops and the captains wore . . . Yellow Scarves. Zhang Jue instructed his troops as follows, “Today the empire of the Han dynasty is bound to end and I am bound to rise. If one day I will be lord, the greatest soldiers will be appointed as princes, the lesser ones will be appointed as marquises, and even the bottom rung will be appointed as prefects.”
When this meeting was over, they had no armor or weapons at all. In the beginning they all wore soft battle clothing and carried only rakes and [5b] clubs. But the leaders, Zhang Jue and the two others, led these one hundred thousand men and first took Yangzhou to provide battle dress and armor, bows and swords, saddles and horses, and all other weapons.
Setting out with their army, they started from Guangning Commandery in Yangzhou Prefecture. Whenever they came upon some village, they took that village; whenever they came upon some district, they took that district—they took countless counties and prefectures. Whenever they came to a place, whole families were enlisted in their rebellion. Those who did not comply were either killed, conquered, or enslaved. Occupying two-thirds of the Han empire, the Yellow Scarves had amassed three hundred sixty thousand people in total.
Here our tale divides. One day Emperor Ling of the Han received his ministers in audience and deliberated with the high ministers, saying, “Now the Yellow Scarves number three hundred and sixty thousand in total. What is to be done?”
Huangfu Song stepped forward from the ranks and reported, “This humble minister now makes this request,‘Your Majesty, if you will accept my three conditions, the Yellow Scarves will disappear by themselves.’”

The Oath in the Peach Garden 13
When the emperor asked which three conditions, he replied, “The first condition is that you promulgate throughout the empire an edict of pardon for all violent criminals who rose in rebellion and gathered in the mountain forests, who attacked and plundered fortified cities; secondly for all those who killed or harmed imperial officials, attacked or robbed granaries and storehouses, and wounded or harmed the common people; and thirdly for all those who are willing on their own initiative to leave the Yellow Scarves to become good subjects of the state—but should they not leave the Yellow Scarves, they will be slain along with their whole family.”
The emperor said, “We will follow your proposal and on the day the proclamation of pardon arrives, all will be pardoned and forgiven.”
Huangfu Song also reported, “At present the troops of the Han dynasty are weak, their officers few, whereas the Yellow Scarves are so powerful in numbers they cannot be defeated. Your Majesty can summon a volunteer army throughouttheempire,promisingthemhighofficeandgreatrewards.Youshouldalso appoint a grand marshal, and provide him with blank patents of office21 and great rewards for the troops.‘When great rewards are offered, men of courage will come forward.’”
When the emperor asked, “Who should be the grand marshal?” the answer was, “If there is someone else who can be grand marshal, then hand the seal of office to him, but if there is no one else, I myself will go.”
The emperor said, “Well, then you take the seal.”
He provided him with blank patents of office and treasure, and made him commander of the one hundred thousand men of the Imperial Guard. He gave a royal order, “Even though you lack the Simurgh Conveyance,22 act at your own discretion, as if it were Us in person.”
After Huangfu Song had received the golden seal and had become grand marshal, he took his leave of the emperor and left the court leading his army.
The Oath in the Peach Garden
Hereourtaledivides. Apoemreads,
The dangerous tilt of the house of Han was surely serious,
The rebellious chaos of the Yellow Scarves spread all over the East. If it hadn’t been for the lawless deeds of these bandit traitors, How could those “true beams to support heaven” have ever appeared?
  
The story goes that there was a man named [6a] Guan Yu, also known as Yunchang. He hailed from Xieliang in Puzhou in Pingyang. From birth he had the eyebrows of a god and the eyes of a phoenix, a curly beard and face like purple jade; he was nine feet, two inches tall23 and loved to read the Springs and Autumns and Zuo’s Commentary. When he studied the biographies of rebellious vassals and evil sons, he was filled with a furious hatred. He killed a district magistrate because the latter coveted wealth and loved kickbacks and greatly harmed the common people. Fleeing for his life he became a fugitive and went to Zhuo Commandery.
If he would not have fled for his life, drifting and roaming about, How would he have met friends who prized righteousness over gold?
The story goes that there was a man named Zhang Fei, also known as Yide, who hailed from Fanyang in Zhuo Commandery, in the princedom of Yan. From birth he had the head of a panther and round eyes, the jowls of a swallow, and the whiskers of a tiger; his body was more than nine feet tall, and his voice resounded like a huge bell. He came from a very rich family. Because he was idly standing outside, he saw Lord Guan pass through the streets: his physique was extraordinary, but his clothes were in tatters—he was not a local man. So he stepped forward and greeted Lord Guan with a bow, which the latter returned.
Fei asked him, “Sir, where are you going? And where are you from?” As Lord Guan was being questioned by Fei, he saw that Fei too had an exceptional physique, and said, “I hail from Xiezhou in Hedong. Because the local magistrate treated the people most cruelly, I killed him. Not daring to stay in my village, I came to this place to seek safety.” When Fei heard this tale, he realized that Lord Guan had the ambition of a true man, and invited him to a wineshop. Fei ordered up some wine, “Bring us two hundred coins worth of wine.” The owner brought it promptly.
Lord Guan saw that Fei was a serious person. As they were talking and speaking, they were in complete harmony. When the wine was finished, Lord Guan wanted to buy the next round, but he had no money with him and looked uncomfortable about it. Fei said, “How could that be?” And he ordered the owner to bring more wine. The two of them toasted each other, and as they were talking found themselves in such harmony that they resembled old friends. Indeed:
The day that dragon and tiger meet with each other Is the time when lord and vassal happily unite.
 
The Oath in the Peach Garden 15
Let us begin to speak about a man named Liu Bei, also known as Xuande. He hailed from Fanyang in Zhuo Commandery and was the worthy seventeenthgeneration great-grandson of Emperor Jingdi of the Han and a descendant of Liu Sheng, the Quiet Prince of Zhongshan. From birth he had a dragon face, an aquiline nose, the eyes of a phoenix, the back of Yu, and the shoulders of Tang;24 his body was seven feet, five inches tall, and his hands hung down below his knees. When he was speaking, joy or [6b] anger never showed on his face, and he loved to befriend heroes. As a child he had lost his father; he lived with his mother and made a living by weaving mats and plaiting sandals. At the southeastern corner of his house a mulberry tree grew above the fence. It was more than fifty feet tall. If you had a look at it from close up you saw the various layers of leaves resembled the canopy of a little carriage. Passersby all marveled at the exceptional nature of this tree, which was bound to produce a man destined for greatness. When Xuande was still a child he would play below this tree with other children in the family, and say, “I am the Son of Heaven, and this is the Great Audience Hall.”
When his uncle Liu Deran noticed him uttering these words, he said, “Don’t wipe out our family with light-hearted words!”
Deran’s father was Yuanqi, and Yuanqi’s wife said, “He has his own family. Chase him away from our gates.”
“But,” said Yuanqi, “If our family has such a boy, he is surely no common person. Don’t speak such words!” When the boy turned fifteen, his mother had him travel and study, and he studied at the house of Lu Zhi, the former prefect of Jiujiang, whom he honored as his teacher. But Lord Liu did not like the study of books very much; he loved dogs and horses and fine clothes, and was fond of music.
On this day, after he had plaited his sandals and gone to the market and had sold them, he also came into this wineshop to buy a drink. When Guan and Zhang saw the extraordinary physique of Lord Liu and his thousand kinds of indescribable blessings, Lord Guan offered him a drink. When Lord Liu saw that these two people also had exceptional physiques, he was very pleased and did not reject the offer, but took the cup and promptly drank it. When he had finished it, Zhang Fei offered him a cup, which he also accepted and finished. Fei invited him to sit with them, and after they had finished three cups of wine, the three of them stayed together as though old friends united in harmony.
But Zhang Fei said, “This is no place for us to sit. If you two gentlemen have no objection, let’s go to my place and have a drink.” When the two of them heard this, they promptly followed Fei to his house. In the back there was a peach orchard, and in that orchard there was a little pavilion. Fei thereupon
 
invited the two of them and brought wine to the pavilion, where the three of them happily drank. While they were drinking, each told his age: Lord Liu was the eldest, Lord Guan was the next, and Fei was the youngest. And so the eldest became the eldest brother, and the youngest the youngest brother. They slaughtered a white horse in sacrifice to Heaven, and killed a black ox in sacrifice to Earth. They did not find it necessary to be born on the same day, but they vowed to die on the same day. The three of them would be inseparable in walking, sitting, and sleeping. They swore to be brothers.
Lord Liu saw that the situation of the Han dynasty was as perilous as piledup eggs: robbers and bandits arose in swarms and the common people suffered distress. [7a] He said with a sigh, “Should a real man live like this in this world?” Time and again they discussed how they could save the common people from this terrible situation, and how they could free the Son of Heaven from his powerless situation. They saw traitorous ministers ignore orders and bandits manipulate power, and were filled with indignation!
Because dragon and tigers are filled with love and righteousness, Evil sons and slanderous ministers are startled from their sleep.
Let us speak now instead about that one day Zhang Fei informed his two elder brothers, “At present the Yellow Scarves rebels are spreading everywhere, plundering the people’s money, and stealing their wives and daughters. If these rebels come here, I may be very rich, but I won’t be able to do anything about it.”
Xuande said, “So what should we do in such a situation?”
Fei said, “The best for us is to inform the Prince of Yan and hire some volunteer soldiers. Then what do we have to fear even if these rebels show up?”
Xuande and Lord Guan said, “Such an action makes sense.” And so they got on their horses, left Zhang’s home, and came to discuss the situation with the Prince of Yan.
In a snap of the fingers they had reached the steps before the palace of the Prince of Yan, but when they dismounted, they were barred from entering by the gatekeeper. Zhang Fei said, “I’ve come here for the very purpose of seeing the prince as I have something to discuss with him.”
The gatekeeper replied, “Just wait here for a while and let me inform the prince.” The gatekeeper reached the front of the main hall and stated, “There’s someone outside the palace who wants to discuss something with you, my prince.”
The Prince of Yan said, “Ask him in.” Zhang Fei immediately followed the gatekeeper into the hall, and the Prince of Yan granted Zhang Fei a seat.
The Prince of Yan asked, “What is your business?”

The Campaign against the Yellow Scarves 17
“The Yellow Scarves,” replied Zhang Fei, “are now spreading all over the world. Should they come to this city and it is completely unprepared, wouldn’t they trample the capital of Yan to dust?”
The Prince of Yan replied, “That may be so, but the government storehouse is without money and the official granaries are empty, so I lack the food and fodder to provision an army. And who could be their leader?”
Zhang Fei said, “Even though I am only a lowly subject under your command,25 I do have a bit of family property that can be used to provide for troops.”
“But,” replied the Prince of Yan, “even if we could summon some volunteers, whom could we appoint as their leader?”
Zhang Fei said, “There’s someone staying at my place whose name is Liu Bei and he is also known as Xuande. He is a descendant of Liu Sheng, the Quiet Prince of Zhongshan. This man was born with a dragon’s nose and a phoenix’s eyes; his ears hang down below his shoulders and his hands hang down beyond his knees. He can be the leader.”
The Prince of Yan immediately issued an order to raise the flag for summoning volunteers. Their leader was Liu Xuande, and under him served Guan Yunchang, Zhang Yide, Mei Fang, Jian Xianhe, and Sun Qian. [7b] Within a month they had summoned an army of three thousand five hundred volunteers.
The Campaign against the Yellow Scarves
The Prince of Yan was out one day with Liu Bei training troops on the parade grounds. When the Prince of Yan inspected them he saw that all of the troops and officers they had raised were strong and each of them was dauntingly brave. The Prince of Yan was very pleased. But at the main gate someone showed up who reported, “Disaster!”
Youzhou Commandery summoned braves who raised buckle and spear: The mutinous Yellow Scarves had come to seek out their own deaths.
When the Prince of Yan asked, “What kind of disaster?” the answer was, “Right now the Yellow Scarves are only a hundred li from this city and have come to take Youzhou.”
The Prince of Yan said, “Leader of the volunteers, what shall we do?”
 
“My lord, don’t worry,” said Xuande, “I want to lead this army out to defeat the Yellow Scarves.” Having said this, Xuande took his leave of the Prince of Yan and led the troops they had raised thirty li out of the city where they stationed themselves.
Xuande sat down in his tent and asked, “Who dares go forth to find out the strength of the bandit troops?” Before he had even finished speaking Zhang Fei, in front of the tent, spoke out, “I will. I want to go alone!”
Xuande replied, “Go, brother, but be careful!” When he had said this, Zhang Fei mounted his horse and left the camp.
In no time at all, Zhang Fei returned and dismounted from his horse in front of the tent, and reported, “Right now the Son of Heaven has sent out the grand marshal, Huangfu Song, with a writ of pardon. If there are any who have committed a crime, but who will summon troops and buy horses and dare defeat the Yellow Scarves, they will be given the seal of vanguard. And once they will have annihilated the Yellow Scarves, they will be appointed to office and given rewards. Brother, so my proposal is this: here we rely only on the lord of a single commandery, so it would be much better to join the grand marshal of the Han and spend our efforts on behalf of the state. Fighting in the east and extirpating in the west, conquering in the south and campaigning in the north, we will manifest our merit in the present and leave a name for the future.”
When Xuande had heard Zhang Fei’s words he was very pleased and immediately led the men under his command out of camp to welcome the grand marshal.
When the grand marshal arrived at the tent, he said, “Now the Son of Heaven pardons all of you for the crime of raising an army of volunteers. If you defeat the Yellow Scarves, you will be promptly given high office and rich reward.” After he said this, the grand marshal granted Xuande a seat. Guan Yu, Zhang Fei, and the others were just about to depart.26 And when the grand marshal noticed the heroic looks of Xuande, Guan, and Zhang, he was greatly pleased. “With such heroes as these, I see the Yellow Scarves traitors as no more than grass or weeds.” The grand marshal immediately told Xuande to assume the seal of vanguard and then dispatched fast riders to go and determine [8a] the strength of the Yellow Scarves.
When the spies returned they reported, “The major force of the bandit troops are in Xiqing Prefecture in Yanzhou, and their five hundred thousand men are stationed in two places. Three hundred thousand are in Yanzhou. In Apricot-Forest Village, thirty li from Yanzhou, two leaders, called Zhang Bao and Zhang Biao, are in charge of the other two hundred thousand.” The grand
 
The Campaign against the Yellow Scarves 19
marshal ordered the vanguard to lead fifty thousand troops to assess the real situation in Xiqing Prefecture.27
“I don’t need fifty thousand,” replied Liu Bei. “Using only the three thousand five hundred men now under my command, I will go first to Rencheng District and there make camp.” The grand marshal’s major force followed behind and also made camp in Rencheng District.
The grand marshal once again asked his officers who would be willing to go and find out the actual situation and persuade the bandits to surrender. Liu Bei said, “I am the vanguard now and I want to go.” He was immediately provided with proclamations of pardon. When Liu Bei had been provided with these pardons, he took his leave of the grand marshal and led his own troops to the eastern gate of the district capital of Rencheng, where he made his way across the river to go to Ban Village. Xuande asked, “How far is it from here to Apricot-Forest Village?” “About fifteen li.” Xuande then asked his troops, “Who can take this proclamation of pardon to Apricot-Forest Village and invite Zhang Biao to surrender?” As soon as he had finished speaking, Zhang Fei replied, “I want to go.” “How many troops do you need?” “I don’t need any,” Zhang Fei replied, “I will go alone. I’ll take the proclamation of pardon to Apricot-Forest Village and invite Zhang Biao to surrender.”
So Zhang Fei departed, a single rider on a single horse. When he reached Apricot-Forest Village, soldiers guarding the gate tried, but were unable, to block his way and he proceeded straight to the commander’s tent in the middle of the army, where he halted his horse and rested his lance across his saddle. Over fifty people were seated in that tent, and the one sitting in the middle was Zhang Biao. Around the tent over five hundred men readied their lances. Zhang Biao and his men were all surprised and Zhang Biao asked, “Who are you? Perhaps a spy?” Zhang Fei replied, “I am not a spy. I am a simple soldier in the vanguard command of the grand marshal of the Han. I didn’t come here for any private business, but I bring you the sagely edict of the emperor and a proclamation of pardon. Even if you have committed the most defiant of crimes, plotting rebellion, or have killed officials appointed by the Son of Heaven, you will all be pardoned. If you join the Han, take off your Yellow Scarves, and raise the flags of our state, your sons will be ensured an appointment and your wife will be ennobled, and you will receive a high office and great rewards. But if you don’t join us, you will all be slaughtered.”
When Zhang Biao heard this, [8b] he was furious and ordered his underling to immediately set to . . . and they all came forward at once to try and stab Zhang Fei. He paid them no heed but firmly closed his fingers on the end of his eighteen-foot lance and twirled it in a circle so none of these troops could
 
approach him. Who knows how many lances and bucklers of the bandit troops he snapped? The bandit troops in the camp cried out, and, frightened and scared, scattered on their own. On his single horse Zhang Fei moved at liberty through the bandit army and not a single one dared oppose him. Then the bandit troops heard the sounds of gongs and drums, and Zhang Biao saw someone report at the tent, “Your Majesty, a disaster!” Zhang Biao asked, “What kind of disaster?” “The vanguard of the Han has been divided into six companies of five hundred men each. With their bronze drums banging wildly, banners waving and troops yelling, they have captured the gate and are bursting into the camp.” Zhang Biao led his troops as fast as he could in a mass flight to Yanzhou. The Han troops followed in hot pursuit for over fifty li.
Xuande then collected his troops, returned to Apricot-Forest Village, and made camp. He ordered his soldiers to guard the gates of the camp and then he checked on his officers. When he asked how far his troops had chased those bandit troops, the answer was, “They all entered the city of Yanzhou. The old and young were abandoned and we killed them all.” Xuande then sent a report to the grand marshal and told him to hasten to Apricot-Forest Village. When the grand marshal saw the report, he was very pleased and immediately led his troops to Apricot-Forest Village. Liu Bei received the grand marshal and they sat together in the tent for a banquet.28 The grand marshal issued an order, “All of the the troops of the vanguard and the officers and leaders under the command of the grand marshal shall be rewarded.”
As they were banqueting, a spy arrived before the tent to report, “Zhang Biao just entered Yanzhou and has combined his troops with those of Zhang Bao; they have a huge force.” When the spy had finished, the grand marshal issued an order, “Who dares take Yanzhou?” “I want to go,” Xuande replied. The grand marshal was very pleased, “Since the bandit army is huge in numbers, and ‘a few are no match for a crowd,’ you should take some additional troops with you.” But Liu Bei said, “I don’t need many troops. It will suffice to take only a mixed troop of brave soldiers under my command.” “Then go,” replied the grand marshal, “but be careful.”
Xuande immediately took his leave from the grand marshal and, provided with proclamations of pardon, rushed off to Yanzhou. At a distance of some tenlifromYanzhouhemadecamp.Xuandeasked,“Whowilltaketheseproclamations of pardon and invite Zhang Biao and Zhang Bao to surrender?” Zhang Fei replied, “I want to go!” Xuande asked, [9a] “How many troops will you need?” “I will not need a single one,” Zhang Fei replied, “I will go alone.” But Xuande said, “I’m afraid something might go wrong. You should take five hundred troops with you.” “No need,” said Zhang Fei, and he repeated, “No need.”
 
The Campaign against the Yellow Scarves 21
Liu Bei said, “Then take a few less.” Zhang Fei then said, “I am summoning those of you who willingly volunteer. If you follow me, the sons and grandsons of those who attain success will enjoy a state salary forever.” At his first call, he got seven men and seven horses; at his second call he got three men and three horses; and at his third call he got two men and two horses, so all together they were thirteen, and he said, “This is enough.”
Zhang Fei led the thirteen to Yanzhou, bearing the proclamations of pardon. When they arrived outside the city wall, Zhang Fei had a good look at the wall and moat, and the war towers and battle sheds on the wall. “Deer antlers” had been buried deep in the earth29 and the moat had been dredged. On top of the wall he saw “rolling logs”30 and catapult stones were everywhere; the drawbridge was drawn up and the slide gates were lowered. From outside the city wall Zhang Fei loudly called out, “Who’s up there? Let’s talk!” After he spoke, a group of soldiers on the wall engaged in conversation with him, and asked, “Who are you, soldier?” Zhang Fei replied, “I am Zhang Fei, a soldier of the vanguard general under the command of the grand marshal of the Han.” And he asked the man on the wall, “Who are you?” “I am the captain that holds Yanzhou, Zhang Bao.” Zhang Fei said, “I am now bringing proclamations of pardon. If you surrender, you will be pardoned and everyone will be spared punishment, appointed to an office, promoted in rank, and richly rewarded. But if you do not surrender, you all will be massacred together.” When Zhang Bao heard this he was enraged and immediately wanted to open the gate and engage him in battle.
But Zhang Biao said, “No way! When I was at Apricot-Forest Village, this guy rode right into my camp on a single horse; none of my troops could stop him. That’s why Apricot-Forest Village was lost.” When Zhang Bao asked, “What should we do in this case?” “Seal the gates tight,” answered Zhang Biao, “And don’t go outside, lest Zhang Fei have some trick up his sleeve. Let’s send a written report to Yangzhou to ask for relief.” Zhang Fei yelled out at the foot of the wall, but the people on top kept silent. A furious Zhang Fei circled the city cursing them loudly, but nobody reacted. He made another circuit and reached the south gate, where he shouted from the foot of the wall, “Who is guarding the gate?” But again nobody reacted.
When Zhang Fei saw no response, he said to his troops, [9b] “From the time we became soldiers of the Han, our saddles have never left our horses, and our armor has never left our bodies; pillowing on our bows, the sand was imprinted with moons, sleeping in our armor, the earth grew scales. On bitter campaigns in fierce battles, grappling with the enemy to see who lives or dies, we have really suffered! But today, we reach these willow trees here by the moat.
 
Let us shed our armor in the willows’ shade, and bathe in the city moat while our horses rest under the trees.” While doing so, Zhang Fei pointed to those on the city wall and cursed them once again.
Zhang Biao became enraged and, seeing that Zhang Fei was bathing in the city moat leaving man and horse unprepared, said to his elder brother, “If I do not kill this lout now, would I be capable of dying without shame?” His elder brother Bao said, “We have roughly five hundred thousand troops and a thousand officers. With a hundred thousand troops at its head, our army has rampaged throughout the world and no one dared oppose us. We have occupied two-thirds of the world of the Han. Look, soon all the land will belong to us. Today Zhang Fei appears on the scene. Just because you lost that little camp at Apricot-Forest Village, you are suddenly filled with fear and trepidation. Whether it be the highest general or the lowest of disbanded soldiers, if any among them dare to fight that Zhang Fei, I will give him rich rewards, and to hell with you.” Zhang Biao said, “It was dark in the evening that day, my troops were not dressed in armor, and the horses were not saddled. And there was a great force behind him. That’s why I lost the camp at Apricot-Forest Village. But today that Zhang Fei is one of only thirteen men. After I lead a company of five thousand soldiers, I will surely capture Zhang Fei!” Zhang Bao said, “Younger brother, what you say is absolutely right.”
He immediately took command of five thousand troops, lowered the drawbridge, and came out of the city. When Zhang Fei saw these troops leaving the city, they quickly mounted their horses and while on horseback put on their armor. Each held a weapon as they fled toward the south. They reached Yao Family Village, just forty li short of Yanzhou. Zhang Biao pursued them all the way to Apricot-Forest Village, where he saw a company of soldiers of over a thousand men, and the head general was none other than the vanguard commander Liu Bei. Holding his paired swords and dressed in a brocade battle gown, he halted his horse below his battle flag and shouted, “Who is the captain of these bandit troops?” “I am Zhang Biao!” When Xuande heard this he wheeled his horse and the two men began to fight. After some twenty rounds, five hundred troops launched a surprise attack from the rear. Their leader was Jian Xianhe. In the melee [10a] they inflicted a heavy defeat on Zhang Biao.
Zhang Biao turned his army toward Yanzhou and fled. Behind him, Liu Bei pressed the attack. At his front was a large forest from which another company of soldiers dashed out; there were over a thousand men. Their leader halted his horse and rested his sword across his saddle. Zhang Biao asked in a panic, “Who are you?” “I am just a soldier under the command of the vanguard of the Han, a certain Guan Yunchang.” He went on, “Bandit general, why don’t you dismountfromyourhorseandsurrender?”ZhangBiaowasalarmed.Yunchang came forward with his sword out, and Zhang Biao was even less inclined to meet such an enemy, so he fled by the backroads.

The Campaign against the Yellow Scarves 23
Liu Bei’s troop caught up, and with Lord Guan they quickly dispatched nine-tenths of Zhang Biao’s command leaving behind only a mere hundred or so. The battle continued until evening, moving forward to the walls of Yanzhou. In a panic Zhang Biao shouted, “Open the gate! Behind is an ambush army that is about to overtake us.” On top of the wall, Zhang Bao had the gate opened as fast as fire, and Zhang Biao and his troops, merely fifty or seventy men, entered the city. Outside the moat in the willow grove, Zhang Fei and his troops were lying in ambush and quickly rushed the city. Of Zhang Biao’s troops who were killed, many fell into the water. Leading a hundred men or so, Zhang Fei shouted out, “Cut the cables of the drawbridge!” The whole pursuing army entered the city walls. Zhang Bao and Zhang Biao had no clue how many Han troops there might be, so in their panic they fled in the dark of night, out through the north gate. Yanzhou had been recaptured.
The next day, when the grand marshal had arranged a banquet and while they were deliberating what to do, a spy returned to report that the defeated army had entered Guangning Commandery. The grand marshal said, “Vanguard, tomorrow you lead your troops and go on ahead, then the main body of troops will break camp and we will all go to Yangzhou.” He took the road to Shengzhou, passed by Haizhou, followed the Lian River and forded the Huai, passed Taizhou, and turned west to Yangzhou. The vanguard of Liu Bei arrived together at a place no more than a bowshot from the city, and there they made camp.
Let us speak now of Zhang Biao who did a roll call of his army. When Zhang Bao could not be accounted for since he had died in the melee, Zhang Jue was furious. On top of that a spy arrived to report, “We have discovered that the army of the Han is quite close and the vanguard Liu Bei has made camp a bowshot away from the city wall.” Zhang Jue summoned his officers and gave them explicit instructions, “ Tomorrow the whole army has to empty out the city to go out to confront Liu Bei.”
At daybreak the next day Zhang Jue led his army out. Liu Bei had divided his troops in three companies, and Guan Yu and Zhang Fei each led [10b] one. As soon as first forces arrived, the two armies engaged in battle. Guan Yu suddenly attacked them from the rear and Zhang Fei pressured them from the sides. Liu Bei told his corporals to shout out, “If you bandit troops take off your yellow scarves and throw down your weapons, you will be covered by a pardon. If one of you captures Zhang Jue you will be ennobled as a Five-Hegemon Liege Lord!” As he finished speaking, the army of the grand marshal arrived. When the bandits saw this, they threw down their spears and discarded their armor. Countless numbers took off their yellow scarves and bowed down to submit. Zhang Jue and Zhang Biao died in the melee.

Once Liu Bei had captured Yangzhou, the grand marshal led his army into the city and issued an order to comfort the common people so they would not suffer in the slightest. Anyone who disobeyed would be punished according to military law. So the common people were all happy. The grand marshal also issued this order: that from the vanguard down, all officers and troops should join him for a banquet the next day.
